   A ball here, there a children’s treat,
   A beau is for Tattiana found!
   A beauty languidly at rest,
   A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
   A boat with splashing oar floats by,
   A bottle of a vintage white
   A bristly bear of monstrous size!
   A canine face with horns thereon,
   A careless looker-on estranged
   A case of books he doth obtain—
   A charm with it in conversation.
   A child devoid of childishness
   a circumstance which perhaps accounts for the southern fervour of
   A constant harping on one tune,
   A coquette loves by calculation,
   A country damsel’s album trim,
   A crab upon a spider rides,
   A critic of the stage malicious,
   A cup of tea upon a tray.
   A curious interest disclose
   A dinner, whimsical each course,
   A double force unto their song
   A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
   A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
   A due which must to earth be paid.
   A dwarf adorned with tail, again
   A dying man with art to soothe,
      A faithful friend to friends, of ladies torturer,
   A feeble version read below,
   A few of different temper deemed,
   A fiery and eccentric mind,
   A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
   A finished madrigal would frame
   A flimsy trace of musings past
   A fond and careful mother been.
   A fop, in dress pedantical.
   A forest now she sees in front
   A fragile bridge and insecure,
   A friar black approaching near,(50)
   A game of chess would often play,
   A gust of passion never tore
   A happy destiny ordained:
   A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
   A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
   A hemisphere beneath her sway,
   A hermit’s life Onéguine led,
   A hidden meaning could impart,
   A hidden train of wild desire.
   A horse’s hoofs she hears—She shrinks!
   A hundred times will not repeat,
   A jolly song and distant horn;
   A joyous troop of little boys
   A kerchief round her silver hair
   A labour, torment, yet a joy,
   A lady’s hand doth never kiss.
   A letter for her hero meant:
   A little Juvenal to spout,
   A little virgin mirror peeps.
   A love which knew no limitation,
   A lover’s letter might convey,
   A maid hath oft, may yet again
   A mild quotation to translate,
   A million bipeds reckons thus
   A moment effervescing stirs,
   A mournful temper on his Muse.
   A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
   A new proprietor arrived,
   a noted “dandy” and man about town. The poet on one occasion
   A noted fop who gambled hard.
   A novel in Lafontaine’s style,
   A nursling yet for Hope to school.
   A pair; though desolate my mind,
   A paragon of virtue he!
   a portion of their heads shaved as a distinctive mark.]
   A print without the picture’s grace,
   A promenade in twilight late
   A register of fleeting thought,
   A ring she heard the ancient strain:
   A Russian household simple quite,
   A scant attendance Lenski showed
   A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
   A sense of social delight,
   A shape half cat and half a crane.
   a short brilliant poem in praise of conviviality. Pushkin
   a similar contrivance in our own old-fashioned tea-urns which
   A single being: ’twas in fine
   A slave of actresses capricious,
   A something somehow have obtained,
   A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
   A sportsman who in covert lies.
   A stream, by winter’s ice unbound,
   A street running parallel to the Neva, and leading from
   A substitute for lamps we hail!
   A table to the fire is brought,
   A tangled wilderness around.
   A tender couplet he combined,
   A thick immense neglected grove
   A timid love to banishment?—
   A tombstone, Aphrodite’s shrine,
   A trouble fell upon the sprites;
   A true Childe Harold my Eugene
   A Vampire fond of meditation,
   A weary season was at hand—
   A wild enthusiastic tongue,
   A windmill too a jig performs
   A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
   A worthy object ’tis, and well
   A young and handsome galliard.
   A young Armida’s lips to press,
   “Abandon hope for ever here!”(38)
   Abandoning insane delight,
   About the crop of hay, the wine,
   About the rain and flax and cattle.”—
   above the 7th hereditary rank is acquired. In the remaining
   Above the ashes of the dead.
   Absorbed in melancholy mood
   Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
   Accelerates her hasty pace,
   Accents of rapture or despair
   account of the bard and his creations will be found in the
   Acquaintance instantly to make.
   Across her youth a shade had come,
   Across the Baltic’s salt sea waves,
   Across the gloom of heaven would sail
   Across the smiling face of dawn.
   Across the stage still madly sweep,
   Address to you one single phrase
   addressed the following impromptu to his friend’s portrait:
   admiration. He was an officer in the Hussars of the Guard, and
   Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
   Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
   Adorned with many a vision bright
   Adroitly seized and carried her;
   Afar, where clothed in green and gold
   affectionate regard of the youthful Pushkin when a student
   _Affectionately yours till death_.
   Again imagination blazed,
   Again in her ethereal dance?
   Against my inclination, friends,
   agreeable than its prototype “Leonora,” inasmuch as the whole
   Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
   Ah! I still struggle to forget
   “Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!”—
   Ah! than a spectre from the dead
   Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
   Akulka who was once Celine,
   “Alack! Tattiana,” she replied,
   “Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
   Alas! for now before her passed
   Alas! he loved as in our times
   Alas! how wretched now my lot!”
   Alas! It is not hard to guess.
   Alas! life’s hours which swiftly fly
   Alas! my friends, the years flit by
   Alas! my stomach it betrays
   Alas! Tattiana fades away,
   Alas! with merited reproach.
   Albums magnificent which scare
   Alike by sighs and flattery.
   All about Olga—to a light
   All are constrained and fetters bear,
   All arise. To the door he goes.
   All breathless and without replies.
   All bustle when he makes a sign:
   All covered up with snow in heaps,
   All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!
   All mothers their sweet girls believed
   All Nature winter seemed to await,
   All overtures of friendship ended.
   All so distinct, and all so white!
   All that industrial London brings
   All that perfection could desire;
   All the creations which below
   All the young people round about,
   All this I know is out of date,
   All this in many cases brings
   All this may be an empty dream,
   All this was novel to Eugene.
   All vanished as an echo goes.
   All visited him at first, of course;
   All which caprice and affluence craves,
   All which in Paris eager taste,
   Allure the young gallant
   Alone amid possessions great,
   Alone beneath your rooftree stay
   Alone he doth his claret drink,
   Alone with my Venetian maid,
   Alone within his habitation
   Along Saint Petersburg’s paved streets,
   Already Autumn chilled the sky,
   Already crisp hoar frosts impose
   Also their feet—yet ne’ertheless
      Alterius facti culpa silenda mihi est.”
   Although the destined coffin nears,
   Although we read him heaps of verse.
   Always together, eventide
   Am I to go through the whole list?”
   Ambassador bought and presented him to Peter the Great who caused
   Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
   Amid a serious disputation,
   Amid submissive herds of men
   Amid the snowdrifts which surround
   Amidst successes flattering
   An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
   An almanac but eight years old.
   An ancient lady full of grace.—
   An ardent heart and yet so mild?—
   an author of promise—unfulfilled.]
   An ear to my confession lend;
   An ever transcendental flight;
   An exile from their troublous reign,
   an inducement in the southern and fertile provinces of Russia
   An infant maiden doth exhort
   An innate love of meditation,
   an ode, “To Her,” which commences thus:
   An oval countenance and pink,
   And “Agathon” replied, amazed.(53)
   And (elbows on the table) they
   And a boy handed round the cream.
   And a determined disposition,
   And a guitar produced we see,
   And a malicious epigram
   And a new diadem supplied.(28)
   And a romance in ancient style
   And after Albion’s proud lyre (20)
   And after them at headlong pace
   And agitate my heart again;
   And all in snow is buried deep.
   And all the joys which Winter knows.
   And all thy precious elegies,
   And all with one accord agreed,
   And all without her husband’s leave.
   And all your love on self bestow;
   And also fashionable beaux.
   And also that my feeble verse—
   And an elegiac poem wrote.
   And an enchanting shoulder shines
   And an habitual sense of pain;
   And at economy was great;
   And at the altar of their fame
   And barely visible the smoke
   And be as happy—as I might.
   And beats with rapid foot the floor.
   And beckon to the passing sails.
   And bends her mirror on the moon,
   And bitter tears of fright I shed.
   And bitter torment never known.
   And bless mankind with full delight.
   And both of dull existence tired,
   And breathe a drama in his ear.
   And breathe the balmy breath of night;
   And breathes upon the chilly glass,
   And buried deep in meditation,
   And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
   And by a sweet delusion he
   And by the fiddle’s rushing sound
   And by the world repeated oft,
   And calmly sleeps the hours away,
   And cannot anything conceal,
   And care but little for its ends.
   And cares not farther to proceed;
   And clad in airy costume took
   And Comet champagne foaming flows.
   And consolation soon begot.
   And cool sagacious mind he had:
   And courtier, fop, and usurer
   And cried within myself: ’tis he!
   And crossed with trembling hand the maid.
   And cry: he was a poet great!
   And dark and drear the evenings were,
   And death before the husband wide
   And deem the world perfection is!
   And disappear in space; then she
   And distance interposed in vain,
   And dream of life’s delightful dawn?
   And due precautions take betimes.
   And ease and fashionable waste,—
   And ease the tortures of the heart—
   And education runs to waste,
   And Eugene ever in her soul
   And Eugene soon discovered there
   And every morning I awake
   And every year distributed
   And eye which gleams with inspiration—
   And fields my joys have ever been;
   And finally he deigns let fall
   And following them ye might espy
   And freezing fits of weariness.
   And from his dressing-room would pass
   And from the country all around
   And from the Millionaya afar(19)
   And from the misty woodland nigh
   And full of innocent delight,
   And gallicisms I love as well
   And gave himself but little pain
   And gazed around with eyes of flame;
   And gently hovered o’er my head?
   And gloomy epigrams malicious.
   And gossip of the town and fashion
   And gradually day unfolds.
   And grasp a stirrup fortunate—
   And grown more curious by far
   And had with waddling in the end
   And handsome countenance combined,
   And harmony was soon restored.
   And hastened to his uncle’s side,
   And hat surnamed a “Bolivar”(6)
   And hated casual visitors,
   And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
   And he who, jealousy disarmed,
   And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
   And her upon the threshold laid.
   And her voice sweeter than the sounds
   And herds of oxen wandering low;
   And honestly ’tis my belief
   And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
   And husbands’ tedious amity?
   And I admired their common sense
   And I confess that now-a-days
   And I, remembering Svetlana,(54)
   And impiously should declare,
   And in a vision, sinless, bright,
   And in addition youth is flame
   And in her conversation drawled.
   And in her grasp the letter shakes,
   And in her native language she
   And in reality one day
   And in the bathroom did command
   And in the final tome we learnt,
   And in the frosty night alone
   And in the morning doth not know
   And in the Summer Garden rove.
   And irrigate them with champagne;
   and is vainly reproved for such blasphemy by her mother.
   And isolated from all men,
   And judgment which unsteady veers
   And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
   And leads a solitary life?
   And leans upon the monster’s arm,
   And led me off to church with song.”
   And Lenski followed—a light broke—
   And life and fate in turn selected
   And like Childe Harold gloomily
   And like his shadow dogged his life,
   And like Napoleons each of us
   And like the prisoner’s our delight
   And Limburg cheese alive and old
   And long internal agitation
   And long perukes hath vanishèd.
   And love’s delicious diadem
   And loves you as—a relative!
   And madrigals I’m asked to write!
   And many a caravan on high
   And many another slily sneered;
   And marvels deemed he thus should view.
   And may fall headlong any time.
   And modest, cheerful as the morn,
   And more imagination teems.
   And my dark soul to light was brought;
   And my Eugene the path must trace—
   And naked uniformity.
   And natural benevolence,
   And never hath our language proud
   And no ridiculous report,
   And not a speck of dirt descried.
   And nothing more important sees;
   And now ’tis night, the guardian moon
   And now his youthful heart desires
   And now philanthropy his soul,
   And now she skips and now she springs
   And now we hear delightedly
   And o’er the granite coping bent,
   And of the attic. Honestly,
   And of the irksome harness tires,
   And oft at eventide a throng
   And oft its Dictionary thumb.(13)
   And oh! what verses, what delights,
   And on the footstool sitting down
   And on the last one, underlined:
   And others rise ephemeral!
   And our successors soon shall drive
   And overcome antipathies
   And pauses oft to serve out bread.
   And pelt him with cherries,
   And physic bring with mournful face,
   And pleasure’s daily blandishment,
   And privileges nice allowed,
   And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!(47)
   And read our newspapers scarce ever,
   And rising from her bench proceeds;
   And roofs near morn blanched o’er with snow;
   And saying this Vladimir drained
   and secondly to “Eda,” by Baratynski, a poem descriptive of life
   And secretly their views expound.
   And shall adopt some new caprice.
   And she despite herself would waste
   And shorter had the days become.
   And showed with an uncertain light
   And silent as the maid Svetlana(30)
   And silently I here must die—
   And so—God bless them, if He list.
   And so Tattiana was her name,
   And solitude and calm delight,
   And solitude and calm delight.
   And soon Lel hovered o’er her head.(55)
   And soon Onéguine’s door beside
   And soon the friendly troop hath fled.
   And starting suddenly doth say:
   And stay whose length none recollects.
   And still the coachmen round the fires(11)
   And stoves of various shapes abound.
   And straight returning whence he came,
   And such unconsciously he led,
   And tears of reconciliation:
   And terrify a swarm of ducks,
   And that no longer could inspire.
   And that unrivalled paragon,
   And the bad book accompanies.
   And the cold beauties of the season:
   And the conviction soon arose,
   And the fair sex as light as down!
   And the far mountains daintily
   And the kind-hearted servitors:
   And the more surely we ensnare
   And the old nurse a brief prayer said
   And the recesses of my mind
   And the suspicious veteran old,
   And the young girl appeared before
   And the young ladies fortunes told,
   And then “monsieur” supplied her place;(3)
   And then a cup of coffee drank,
   And then made merry pope and guest,
   And then she soon ’twixt work and leisure
   And then the stanzas of my theme
   And then to meditate for days
   And then with blind credulity
   And this the faithful one allows,
   And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
   And though I read it with distress,
   And though perchance a lady may
   And thoughtlessness to woe might lead.”
   And thoughts of Olga first impressed
   And through the lofty windows views
   And thus ancestral dust reveres.
   And thus he never fell among
   And thus he spent eight years of time,
   And thus it is ’twould cause me pain
   And thus secures the prey we seek.
   And thus unto her nurse did say:
   And thy inebriating wave
   And thy protection I implore.
   And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
   And town and friends forgotten quite.
   And traces with a slender finger
   And triumphs in career erotic.
   And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
   And usually despised it too),
   And viewed the door with cunning eye.
   And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
   And visit many a foreign clime,
   And vows will probably be signed:
   And we—an unattractive set—
   And what from its recess appears?
   And what like menaces fatigues,
   And what resulted? Drunk with love,
   And what she from the cards inferred.
   And what the old man might bequeath.
   And when for Olga nurse arrayed
   And when her violence reviewed—
   And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
   And when the watery mirror gleamed
   And where at last his bones repose
   And wheresoe’er thy footsteps err,
   And who is not a tiresome thief?
   And who the rent-roll of his race
   And wholly occupied his day—
   And wildly waves its arms and storms;
   And wisely gallops to the hill.
   And wished to say to him farewell.
   And with his lot in life content,
   And would by candlelight arise.
   And yet he in your cause would strive
   And yet oblivion forbade.
   And you, my youthful damsels fair,
   And you, O maids immaculate,
   And youthful madness, youthful fires.
   And, hanging down her head, the maid
   And, heaving a regretful sigh,
   And, inspiration firing me,
   And, joy of souls effeminate,
   And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
   Announcing to him dinner-time.
   Another bard with art divine
   Another passed; ’twas just the same.
   Another time, so willed it Fate,
   Another with cock’s head appeared,
   Another! to none other I
   Anticipating woe she pined,
   Antiquity no pleasure gave,
   Appear attuned to softer chords;
   Applause, the people’s donative.
   Approach not to gaze at
   Approach not to hearken
   are a prolonged twilight.]
   Are admirable, my dear friend,
   Are all your relatives quite well?
   are also much in vogue during the Carnival.
   Are not with elegance impressed.
   Are oft deceptive—like their feet.
   are provided with a receptacle for a red-hot iron cylinder in
   Are turned upon her. All combine
   are used amongst us by the lower classes only.”]
   Are ye replaced by other maids
   Around her neck, now violently
   Around my stanzas incomplete
   Around the garden homeward hies.
   Around the meadow and the grove.
   Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
   Aroused in him sweet reverie.
   Arouses rustics from their sleep.
   Arrange without the least delay—
   As a babe’s slumber, or the light
   As a poetic life serene,
   As butterflies to blossoms cling.
   As cyphers others to appraise,
   As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
   As every journal now entreats,
   As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
   As formerly much agitation.
   as his predecessor in song, though he certainly did not plead
   As if against obstruction sore
   As if he cruelly had joked!
   As if impossible it were
   As if it were some funeral feast.
   As in a thicket’s humble shade,
   As in her heart the thought sank home,
   As in the timid forest deer,
   As in their turn the seasons roll.
   As lordly mansions ought to be,
   As many entertainments be!
   As men who much had done that day.
   As on the rapid wings of thought
   As partner of my mournful days,
   As rosy lips without a smile,
   As the sins of my youthful days
   As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
   As we lure the young gallant,
   As when the tempest’s veil is drawn
   As Winter in their purity,
   As your light footprints on the green.
   assault and ensuing massacre.]
   Assemble from the neighbourhood:
   Assistance ever will extend,
   At first such contradictions wrought
   At first, but soon became inured
   At first, I clung to secrecy:
   At Làrina’s abode produced
   “At Làrina’s.”—“Hem, that is queer!
   At last became a ruined man.
   At last my father gave his blessing,
   At least by show of sympathy;
   At least their accents and their words
   At morn an icy bath within
   At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
   At neighbouring hospitalities.
   At prisoner’s base she never played.
   At Russ she was by no means clever
   At seven in summer rose from bed,
   at the Lyceum. We regret to add that, having accepted a
   At the same hour she oped her eyes
   At times my reason almost bends,
   At times, if only once a week,
   Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
   attained with the 9th grade, hereditary with the 4th.]
   Attend in male attire arrayed.
   Attentive be unto my rhymes
   Attentive listened to his speech,
   Attentive listened to the lad.
   Attentive to the echoing sound,
   Attentive to the heart’s first beating,
   Attractive in its banefulness?
   Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
   authors of Pushkin’s day and rummage biographical dictionaries
   Authors replete with sacred fire
   Avowal then ’twas time to pray,
   Await the long-delayed caress.
   Awaiting on the shore I roam
   awakes to hear the tinkling of her lover’s sledge approaching.
   Away her golden earrings tore;
   Away! and cease to ring their praise
   Awhile this beauty captivated,
   b. 1753, d. 1814. Introduced to the aged Voltaire during
   Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
   Baratynski, see Note 43.]
   Bard of the “Feasts,” and mournful breast,(43)
   Bard of the Finnish maiden young.(49)
   Barely to draw her breath she seems,
   Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
   Bear gone—she at the threshold placed;
   Beats that of friends and relatives:
   became Vice-President of the Academy of Arts at St. Petersburg.
   Because a member I became.
   Because he could not gourmandise
   Because he yawned at the bare view
   Because her passion wanted art,
   Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
   Because in singleness of thought
   Because she was so innocent,
   Become a faithful wife and e’en
   Become alarmed. So never mind!
   Before he eighteen years attained.
   Before her straight with roguish eyes.
   Before him red roast beef is seen
   Before it ran a stream. Behold!
   Before whose inexperienced sight
   Behold! orthography despising,
   Behold! than polished floor more nice
   Behold! the moon was shining bright
   Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain—”
   being waged between two hostile schools of Russian men of
   Believe me, of my present shame
   Believed, the people’s wisdom weird,
   Beneath her downy pillow placed,
   Beneath her parents’ eyes the maid
   Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
   Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
   Beneath the flag of Quietude,
   Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
   Beneath the sheltering oak tree’s shade
   Beneath the table-cloth of white,
   Beside our youthful heroine fair,
   Beside the stormy sea one day
   Beside the thundering abyss
   Besides the hobbies of a spouse
   Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
   Better than Chateaubriand did
   Between myself and my Eugene,
   Between the stalls, along the toes;
   Beyond this may attempt to write_.
   Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
   Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
   Books he abandoned like the fair,
   “Boredom, my friend, behold the ill—”
   Born of a babbler in a loft
   Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
   Both for the nails and for the tushes.
   Both natural and truthful seemed.
   Both were expectant of the hate
   Both were of passion satiate
   bottle.”]
   Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
   Bright blazed the window of the place,
   Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
   “Bring dinner now without delay!”
   brothers made his way to Constantinople and thence to St. Petersburg
   Bruin is marching at her back!
   Buried in meditation deep,
   But Adam Smith to read appeared,
   But better loved the soft repose
   But boldly I myself resign:
   But borne in spirit far away
   But cannot anyhow evade
   But cannot stand the northern cold.(2)
   But competition I abjure
   But contrary to her advice
   But deeming all this nonsense pure,
   But enough! Now, ’tis my intent
   But Eugene long hath left the press
   But Eugene was by fate preserved,
   But Eugene, hating litigation
   But Eugene, incontestably,
   But even thus not now-a-days!
                          But ever the Hussar.”]
   But finally grew bored by her.
   But finally in wedlock bind.
   But finally she heaves a sigh,
   But Fortune cast our lots apart
   But from the interview what flowed?
   But from the Muses’ loftiest height
   But gray Phillippevna the door
   But grown familiar side by side
   But he desired not to beguile
   But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
   But I—what is all this to me?
   But I await thee: scarce alive
   But I came not to adulate:
   But I must now employ my Muse
   But I perceive thou dost not heed—”
   But I the products of my Muse,
   But I was sharp in times gone by.
   But I, in love, was mute and dull.
   But if my lot unfortunate
   But if the truth I must relate,
   But in his heart dissatisfied,
   But Lenski madrigals ne’er wrote
   But Lenski, having no desire
   But Lenski, I should be so glad
   But little warmth the fireplace lends,
   But lo! already the moon’s light
   But lo! the friends to chat commence.
   But lonely beneath Finnish skies
   But look you—ah! do not refuse.”
   But Lord! from friends deliver me!
   but made his peace with Napoleon and was appointed Archbishop
   But memory like a serpent’s tooth
   But merely to exasperate;
   But more the passions occupy
   But nought for this Tattiana cares.
   But now a question in this wise
   But now in her effulgence pale
   But now my mind is desolate,
   But now our minds are mystified
   But Olga would not such peruse.
   But on the third of grove and mead
   But praised be God! in health art thou!
   But promise of our meeting gave,
   But proudly in his song preserved
   But say he was a genius who
   But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
   But send your grandson before long.”
   But shall depict the touching scene
   But since to the backdoor they led
   But sits in bed with air depressed,
   But soon she altered all her ways,
   But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
   But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
   But still more stupid did appear
   “But strange am I to happiness;
   But such is not my project now,
   But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
   But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
   But sweeter in a midnight dream
   But Tania ne’er displayed a passion
   “But tell me, nurse, can you relate
   But that Princess Pauline of old,
   But the date subsequently changed
   But this a heinous crime appeared
   But this adventure’s consequence
   But this amusement delicate
   But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
   But to Onéguine! _A propos!_
   But to the garden once again
   But trembling on the mirror dark
   But tremor still her frame possessed,
   But trusted the ideal she wrought?—
   But turning morning into night,
   But upon all that Eugene knew
   But was our friend Eugene content,
   But were it not immoral I
   But what a nuisance it will be,
   But what astonished do I find
   But when Tattiana’s hand had ta’en
   But when the winter season came
   But wherefore not?—’Tis pleasant, nice,
   “But which, my dear?—In days of yore
   But why are your cheeks whitening?”
   But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
   But wilful, frivolous, and light.
   But will not modify a tittle—
   But with confused and bashful air,
   But with her elder sister I
   But wretched who anticipates,
   But ye, O happy husbands, ye
   But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
   But, as he never opened them,
   But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
   But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
   But, O ye tomes without compare,
   But, to his uncle’s mansion flown,
   By absence who hath chilled his love,
   By an _obrok’s_ indulgent rate:(23)
   By an avowal just as plain.
   By barren snow heaped up and bound,
   By bee and butterfly which pass.
   By children and by faithful wife
   By daily life deteriorated,
   By dull insensibility,
   By every proper-minded wife,
   By Faublas in his youth was schooled,(5)
   By friendship how they were abused,
   By Heaven in lieu of happiness.
   By indolence and languor fired
   By love’s inevitable flame.
   By many a lamp illuminate,
   by means of a “svakha,” or matchmaker. In Russia unmarried
   By melancholy fogs concealed.
   By neighbouring families bewept,
   By night prepared for sorcery,
   By Olga’s hand distributed
   By other thoughts be occupied.
   By poor Tattiana in the blues;
   By Providence’s dark decree!
   By rank as settled by the State.(27)
   By such allusions scandalous,
   By sympathy I have been driven.
   By the decree of Mighty Jove,
   By the fine silver of the north.
   By the old lime-tree or the rill,
   By time (who can anticipate?)
   By Tolstoy’s pencil marvellous,
   by various expedients, is the favourite pastime on these
   Byron’s capricious phantasy
   Callous to all he seemed to be.
   Can hearty welcome give alone.
   Can lower depths beyond remain?
   Can we not stealthily make out
      CANTO THE FIFTH
   Canto The Fifth
   Canto the First of this romance.
      CANTO THE FOURTH
   Canto The Fourth
      CANTO THE SECOND
   Canto The Second
      CANTO THE THIRD
   Canto The Third
   Capers applauds with clap of hands,
   Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fêtes;
   Careless of fame his spirit high
   Carried away by ecstasy,
   Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
   catastrophe turns out a dream brought on by “sorcery,” during the
   Caucasus_, the latter, _The Fountain of Baktchiserai_. The
   Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
   Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
   censors, and consequently expunged.
   center. The tea-pot is usually placed on the top of the
   Certain misfortune near opined.
   Ch. Nodier. “The Vampire,” a tale published in 1819, was
   Chained to his bedside night and day
   Charming is your sincerity,
   Charming with grave simplicity.
   Charms more enduring in the end.
   chiefly known for his erotic poetry which attracted the
   China and bronze the tables weight,
   Choosing a profitable trade,
   “Christmas Carols” is not an exact equivalent for the Russian
   circumstances may be easily imagined which, under such a
   Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,—(32)
   combined with amiability and strict morality; also a species of
   Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
   Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
   Come sing we in chorus
   _Come to my golden palace, dear_!(25)
   Comfort and succour to the poor,
   Command him not to say a word—
   “Command me, darling, what you choose”—
   commences thus: “The cat asked the kitten to sleep on the stove.”]
   Companion of my childhood’s days.
   Compassion now or wrath inspires
   Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
   Confess, O ye who this peruse,
                             _Confessions de J. J. Rousseau_]
   Confessions which a trusting heart
   Confront thy fated torturer!
   Conquer by passion and address,
   consigned to oblivion, will impress the reader with the
   Consisting of harmonious lays,
   Constant affection intertwined
   Contemplativeness, her delight,
   contemporaries. The editor once excused himself for some
   content with a single development of Burger’s ghastly production
   Corneille’s majestic genius,
   corsair, and carried a slave to Constantinople. The Russian
   Corset and album and Pauline,
   Could in romantic mantle drape
   Could not conceive how serious Grimm
   Cropped in the latest style his hair,
   Crunching the morning snow she treads;
   Crushing and a confusing noise;
   Custom the despot soon prevails.
   Customs by ages sanctified,
   d. 1797, famous for his bold oration denouncing Robespierre,
   Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
   Dally with a dishevelled tress
   Danced the mazurka gracefully,
   Dared calmly cleanse his nails ’fore him,
   Dark, unavailing reverie,
   Debate commanded ample food—
   Deeming himself a veteran scarred
   Deep into debt his father ran;
   Delicious visions, jests and fights!
   Delighted glances in return;
   Delighted much his former ways
   “Delighted.”—“When?”—“This very night.
   Delusions of a mind untried,
   Demands that I translate for you
   _Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
   departments of the State, civil, military, naval, court,
   departments, civil or otherwise, personal nobility is only
   Deplores a most unworthy spouse
   Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
   des tasses de blanc sur la toilette, mais sur ce qu’entrant un
   Descends the bank with care extreme,
   Describe in detail the affair,
   Desire to rule ye may observe
   Desirous to annihilate
   Despair and anger seize on me,
   Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
   Detecting him the passing horse
   devant moi. Je jugeai qu’un homme qui passe deux heures tous les
   Device of rural minds acute!)
   devoted themselves to the cultivation of the vernacular.]
   Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks,
   Did not their lips with foreign speech
   Did they not all the Russian tongue
   _Didelot_, sometime Director of the ballet at the Opera at
   “Die now, Denis!” In fact, his subsequent performances were
   Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
   Discovered much absurdity,
   Disperse yourselves, darlings,
   Disport yourselves, maidens,
   Do me a favour and appear.
   “Do not—you might—suspicious be;
   Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
   Do not excuse yourself. I read
   Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
   Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
   Domestic life attracts me still,
   Doth in us or our names appear(26)
   Doth love’s incautiousness in her
   Doubt and uncertainty decide:
   Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
   dramatist. His first comedy “The Brigadier,” procured him the
   Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go—
   Dreading the world’s remarks malign,
   Dreamed in the future man and wife.
   Dreaming herself the heroine
   Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
   Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
   Dressed like a London dandy he
   “Drive on!” the cheerful cry goes forth,
   Drive out the cattle from their shed,
   Driving abreast three horses gray.
   E’en as the poet says he leant.(18)
   E’en as the presence of a snake,
   E’en for an instant find delight,
   E’en from her cradle’s earliest dream,
   E’en hopeless egoism’s dark shape.
   Each gust of temper, silly word,
   Either with him or thee in song,
   ‘Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse’—Malfilatre
   Eloquent raver all-surpassing,—
   “Elvina, my dear, come, give me thine hand,” and so forth.]
   eminent English poets have been laid under contribution by him,
   Employ your glasses constantly,
   Enamoured at her feet to fall.
   Enchanted by the moon’s pale beam.
   END OF CANTO THE FIRST
   End of Canto The Fourth
   End of Canto the Second.
   End of Canto the Third
   Endless conjectures all propound
   Endowing us from out her store
   English dramatists had also their share in influencing his mind,
   Engrave the ice with strident noise.
   Enhances love in estimation
   Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows—
   Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
   Ennui can in the country dwell
   Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
   Entrusted all to her sincerely,
   Epistles of six sheets or near,
   Ere the bright messenger had set.
   errand. It is a repulsive subject. “Svetlana,” however, is more
   erroneously attributed to Lord Byron. “Salathiel; the Eternal
   Espy him approaching,
   essentially imitative type. As an example of his Shakespearian
   Esteemed him much as the world goes.
   Eugene at first began to dream,
   Eugene designed with me to start
   Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
   Eugene was touched with sympathy;
   Eugene would speak regarding these.
   Eugene, more tolerant than this
   Euphonious, though I know a spice
   Eve and Twelfth Night. Divination, or the telling of fortunes
   Even as Moscow, city proud.
   Even as the love of children dear.
   Even beneath her parents’ roof
   Even so! His passions soon abated,
   Even the rosy wafer dries
   Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
   Ever to hear the same replies
   every male added to its number, though this could have formed
   Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
   Exceptionless as no rule is,
   Exclaiming, “We must change ’em all!
   Excruciate the heart and late
   Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
   Exist—that their immortal band
   Existence calmly sped along,
   Existence without wife or friends,
   Existence would not make a curse,
   Extended—haunt which Dryads love.
   Extinct the flame which once had fired;
   Extinguished ashes do not blaze—
   Fair source of every fine idea,
   Faithfully shall I now depict,
   False confidence or doubt to impart,
   fame mainly rests. Joukóvski was an unblushing plagiarist. Many
   Fantastic images shall swarm
   Far from his Italy—his own.(4)
   Far from the rest the pair would creep
   Farewell! thou golden days of love!
   Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
   fashionable society. It should be borne in mind that at the time
   favour of the second Catherine. His best, however, is the
   Fearing his pupil to annoy,
   Feeling in others much esteemed.
   Feeling is silly, dangerous.
   Feelings which long had ceased to be
   Felled a calumniator base!
   fermented rye used by the peasantry, and the more expensive
   First reconciled and then content;
   Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
   Flies past the porter to the stair,
   Follow up love—a secret meeting
   Fond declarations they invite
   For a protracted space of time.
   For Ay is like a mistress fair,
   For dolls, e’en from her earliest years,
   For empty sound the rascal swore he
   For ever with thy tattling lyre,
   For first “madame” his wants observed,
   For God’s sake, Lenski, don’t begin!
   For him were but of little worth,
   For I myself was thirteen quite;(35)
   For journalistic deglutition
   For law I _far niente_ take
   For maiden’s hearing deemed unfit),
   For on their brows I trembling read
   For otherwise—God only knows!
   For our amusement ever made
   For promises her feet reveal
   For rural solitude and dreams,
   For shame lift up the modest maid.
   For tallow, wood and other things
   for the dates of their births and deaths. Yet the poet’s prime
   for the purpose of ransoming him; but Peter would not surrender his
   For the young poet they display.
   For treachery had done its worst;
   For twice you came to them and yet
   For two whole days it seemed a change
   For us, may be for many a year.
   For which the poet agonized
   For who imposture can endure,
   For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?
   For your instruction here to tell
   Forgive me! Such the love I bear
   Forgive the fever youth inspires,
   Forgotten in the village lone,
   Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
   Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,(48)
   Found out the secret how at pleasure
   Found the ideal of my youth,
   Found them in darkness side by side,
   Fragments of northern poetry,
   Free scope he yields unto his glance,
   Free, I renewed the idolatry
   Free, in the blossom of his spring,
   French tragedy.
   French was the language of the Russian court and of Russian
   Fresh cause of quarrel then I’ll find,
   Friends and companions,
   Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,(1)
   Friends of the sons of every land,
   Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
   Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
   From first to last page to the rim.
   From gales a hill behind was seen;
   From Gottingen inspired he came,
   From hall to yard and garden flies,
   From happy inspiration flow,
   From henceforth I confide to thee!
   From her half-open vest of night.
   From her my lips shall learn the tongue
   From mere vacuity of mind
   From Romulus unto our day.
   From shades of the relentless past.
   from the basin whilst the remainder sing in chorus the “podbliudni
   from the fact of two gilt crowns being held over the heads
   From whose analysis minute
   From you too Eugene took to flight,
   Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
   Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
   Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
   Full many a glance like lightning flash,
   Funeral amateurs abound!
   Furious he from the table rose;
   garment not known, so far as I am aware, to Western Europe.
   Gently for pranks he would reprove
   Gifts such as these alone could prize,
   Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.(52)
   girls wear their hair in a single long plait or tail, “kossa;”
   Give me just half a glass of wine—
   Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
   Go, on the Neva’s bank appear,
   God grant I meet not at a ball
   “Goddam! Goddam! par un French—Dog.” It is descriptive
   Goddess of lovers’ tender sighs.
   godson who died at the age of ninety-two, having attained the rank
   “Good-bye, Onéguine, I must go.”—
   Good-night.” Behold! she is alone!
   gown.]
   graceful phraseology, and a strong pervading sense of humour.]
   Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
   Gravely repeating to another
   Great sacrifices for his sake!
   Greek names, e.g. Agathon, Philotas, Theodora, Thekla, etc.,
   Grew like a lily pure and white,
   gross error by pleading that he had been “on the loose.”]
   Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
   Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
   Guards fondly hope’s uncertain dream.
   guilty to the fact, since he remarks in his ode to Ovid:
   Habit alleviates the grief
   Habit was given us in distress
   Habit would bring indifference.
   Had a deluded victim been
   Had come both friends and enemies—
   Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
   Had killed me had the like been told.”
   Had let fall many a bitter tear:
   Had not yet withered his young breast.
   Had run across her path at speed,
   Had to compose in secret rhymes,
   Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
   Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
   Happy and glorious_. But this brings
   Happy who thereto can unite
   Hard by the window took her place.”—
   Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
   Harvests of souls unceasingly
   has been carried off by a _kaldoon_, or magician.]
   has now to search for the very names of most of the popular
   Hateful the hollow world became,
   Hath fate apportioned unto thee
   Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
   Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
   Haughty appear, subservient,
   Have e’er a precious tress consigned,
   Have felt love’s agitated kiss
   Have latterly vexatious grown;
   Have shone as one of fashion’s leaders.
   Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
   Having abjured the haunts of men,
   Having for money’s sake alone
   Having lost all in life we prize.
   Having once fixed your interest,
   Having performed his service truly,
   Having this mournful document
   He’s a freemason, so we think.
      “He’s here! Eugene is here!
   He always replied “da” or “nyet,” yes or no, instead of “das”
   He bends his course to Talon’s, where(8)
   He brought from mystic Germany
   He called to mind Tattiana’s grace,
   He deemed his friends but longed to make
   He deemed of human life the goal
   He dragged her by a forest road
   He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
   He enters. High the cork arose
   He enters: in the hall a crowd,
   He enters: rapidly discussion
   He felt the laudable desire
   He finally lost all delight
   He found him on the table laid,
   He hath acquired the world’s esteem
   “He hath neglected us of late.”—
   He heard his soul’s complaint within,
   He hies unto the “Boulevard,”
   He in the early years of life
   He is a charming youth and wise.
   He kindled his poetic flame.
   He knits his brows—’tis silent all.
   He knows Kaverine will repair.(9)
   He laughs, although it aches from cold,
   He left _you_ first, and I must own
   He leisurely adorns for her.
   He nears a spacious mansion’s gate,
   He now a full possession takes,
   He offers her his murderous paw;
   He oft upon his lips would curb,
   “He promised here this day to ride,”
   He racked his brains to find its clue
   He reads at random, reads in vain.
   He roars, and “Ah!” Tattiana cries.
   He round the billiard-table stalked,
   He sang of life’s fresh colours stained
   He sang of love—to love a slave.
   He sang of separation grim,
   He sat, and then the livelong day,
   He seemed for matrimony born.
   He shunned those parties boisterous;
   He smiles, in laughter all combine;
   He somewhat blushing would omit:
   He still made love in a queer way;
   He takes his seat, concludes his game,
   He there is master—that is plain;
   He thought so, and existence charmed.
   He thought to write, but labour long
   He to the festival repairs,
   He took no more the slightest heed;
   He took the room wherein the old
   He wanders in his indolence;
   He was a dangerous fool indeed.
   He was a dear delightful fool—
   He was an honest gentleman,
   He was beloved: or say at least,
   He was most gay. The happy date
   He who economy abhorred,
   He who hath lived and living, thinks,
   He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
   He whom we sing to shall be made
   He will delight you, I am sure,
   He with an innocence extreme
   He with his little maiden played,
   He witnessed tenderly and moved
   He writes upon his parents’ tomb,
   He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
   He yawns, averts his countenance,
   Hears not my importunity!
   heavy obroks have at times been levied on serfs possessed of
   Her all in all did constitute;
   Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
   Her caps and night-dresses to mend.
   Her cheek of rosy loveliness
   Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
   Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
   Her figure perfect grows with time!
   Her foot was in my other hand.
   Her girlish gaiety and sport.
   Her Grandison was in the Guard,
   Her handkerchief she loses now;
   Her head upon her breast declines
   Her health, life’s sweetness and its bloom,
   Her husband was a bridegroom then,
   Her in the pitfalls which we place.
   Her locks were of a golden hue,
   Her Moscow cousin, often told
   Her movements, voice and figure slight,
   Her on a shaky bench sit down;
   Her passion’s faithful counterpart,
   Her sentimental verses all,
   Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
   Her shoulder—Olga swiftly came—
   Her smile and maidenly repose,
   Her suit before my parents pressing:
   Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
   Her weary eyes are filled with tears—
   Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
   Here bottles stand in close array,
   Here I remark all poets are
   Herein my portrait should detect,
   Herself not knowing well the reason,
   Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
   Hid in the gondola’s dark shade,
   hierarchy. There are fourteen grades in the Tchin assigning
   him to be baptized at Vilnius. Subsequently one of Hannibal’s
   Him who inspired both love and awe,
   himself have called it. Indeed, since Byron, poets of his school
   Himself transformed into a hack;
   His ardent soul with full delight.
   His arm he offers. Mute and sad
   His book-shelf instantly doth drape
   His character attracted me.
   His comedies, a noisy rout,
   His constant soul could ever tire,
   His course unto the running brook.
   His cup unto his maiden dear.
   His daily occupations, lo!
   His daughter’s book to ascertain
   His ditties were as pure and bright
   His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
   His fist Onéguine fiercely shook
   His footing on the treacherous rime
   His friends and also enemies
   His friendship I acquired just then;
   His furs are powdered on the way
   His harp beneath that sky had rung
   His hate by slander, and who spends
   His head sinks slowly, rests upon
   His heart reciprocated still
   His Hellespont from bank to bank,
   His housekeeper was wont to scold,
   his imagination. His great-grandfather, Abraham Petròvitch Hannibal,
   His inner consciousness laid bare,
   his last visit to Paris, the patriarch laid his hands upon
   his literary reputation by inditing an “epic” poem entitled
   His malady, whose cause I ween
   His mother from the door doth scold.
   His name: the tenderness of home
   His neighbour’s lowly tomb and mourned
   His own antagonists expert,
   his own grave, from which he has recently issued to execute his
   His pony sniffing the fresh snows
   His shop, a night-cap on his head,
   His son and mortgages his lands.
   His spirit sank with strange delight.
   His transports were quite maidenly,
   His uncle, busy man indeed,
   His valet brings him letters three.
   His vanity first let us pique
   His wife was also mad upon
   his youth appears to have entertained great respect and
   Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
   Homeward returning, he at home
   Hope to conceal and jealousy,
   Hope with her fascinating power
   “How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
   How artless was the note which spoke
   How bitterly he would malign,
   How bright and tender was his look,
   “How came you then to wed a man?”—
   How charming Olga’s shoulders grow!
   How dark the night is getting though!
   How deftly could he transport feign!
   “How dull you are this morning, nurse!”
   How empires store of wealth unfold,
   How flourish, why and wherefore less
   How full of fire his speech would glow!
   How in the country pass this time?
   How like the billow I desired
   “How now, Onéguine, yawning still?”—
   How oft, when on a summer night
   “How often in thine arms I lay;
   How pleasantly the evening jogs
   How sick to death his uncle lay
   How soon he learnt deception’s art,
   How soon he learnt to titillate
   How thy hands burn!”—“Dear nurse, I’m well.
   How well he played the greenhorn’s part
   How with thy medal I would play,
   However cherries might abound,
   However, Tania’s letter reading,
   Hymen’s embarrassments, distress,
   I’ll pass beneath the firmament,
   I’ll sprinkle thee with holy water.—
   I’m not for witchcraft now inclined.
   I’m o’er it ever pondering.
   I’ve had to make for having friends!
   I’ve scanned it with a jealous eye,
   I’ve thought well o’er the general plan,
   I’ve wasted in amusements vain,
   I
   I
   I
   I
I
   I also wandered there of old,
   I am—in love—you know—don’t tell!”
   “I am in love,” her whispers tell
   I am in love, my hour hath come!
   “I am in love, nurse! leave me now.”
   I am not strong enough to state;
   I am not worthy them in aught;
   I ask, all ye who poets are,
   I by the button-hole seize fast
   “I call to witness God on high—”
   I can’t conceive a little dear
   I cannot help it I declare,
   I cannot tell on what pretence—
   I cannot tell the reason why,
   I cannot understand. But lo!
   I envied sore the billows tall,
   I feel thou wast by God sent down
   I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
   I formerly admired her much
   I guard it as a holy thing,
   I had found my predestinate,
   I have dreamed many a vision fair
   I have endured without respite.
   I have known beauties cold and raw
   I have no leisure here to dwell,
   I heard thy voice’s resonance
   I just hint, in parenthesis,
   I know that Parny’s tender pen(42)
   I know there’s none more amiable.
   I lift a warning voice because
   I like the difference to express
   I long by ballets have been bored,
   I long have ceased to offend the laws.
   I love its furious delight,
   I love them, O my dear Elvine,(14)
   I love you with a brother’s love,
   I mean my name not to repeat.”
   I might to connoisseurs repeat
   I mourn, but tears I cannot shed—
   I never should have seen your face
   I once forgot for your sweet cause
   I owe the censorship a little.
   I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
   I promised!—Did I so?—Well, there!
   I sail upon my lake at times
   I say without poetic phrase,
   I see you weep. Those tears of yours
   I should alarm our friendship tried:
   I slumber much, a little read,
   (I speak not of our poems here),
   I still a complication view,
   I the same admonition make.
   I uttered to my lady fair
      I visit in these days, with melancholy mind,
   I was for calm existence made,
   I was half silly with affright.
   I was incensed and he was sad.
   I will descant on love’s sweet dream,
   “I won’t detain you; but ’tis hard
   I would desire my bride to be—
   I would your vigilance arouse,
   I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
   I write to you! Is more required?
   I write, and anguish flies away,
   I yield the fruit of work severe.
   I yield with a low reverence;
   I, after so much eloquence,
   “Ideas and time ne’er backward move;
   Idolatry of liberty,
   If but to lighten Time’s dull rate,
   If cleverly or not I prate.
   If in the scenes of home I might
   If Olga smilingly approve,
   If seriously he hath disease;
   “If the domestic hearth could bless—
   If the fond hope I could have fanned
   If the raw product they possess
   If they but heard domestic loads
   If they were similar in aught.
   If thou wert sitting by my side,
   If wife and children to possess
   II
   II
   II
   II
   II
   III
   III
   III
   III
   III
   imagination of Pushkin is well known. Shakespeare and other
   Imagine! Here alone am I!
   Immersed in melancholy thought,
   Immersed in secret thought I stand
   Impatiently the gallery stamps,
   Impelled to union with his own
   Imperial portraits hang around
   Impetuously clove its way
   important work, written 1817-20. It is a tale relating the adventures
   Impressed him in the least degree,—
   Impressionable for an hour,
   Imprudent prattle of the heart,
   In a half-open dressing-gown
   In age the memory gets worse,
   In aimless ease and far from strife,
   In amorous flights when so inspired,
   in Athens,” “Fingal,” “Demetrius Donskoi,” and “Polyxena,” are
   In books he saw nought to condemn
   In bullets, sabres, and in fight.
   In charming fashion mutilate?
   In clouds of steam above perceive.
   In column blue the smoke doth rise;
   In correspondence been allowed.(39)
   In country solitude you mope,
   In dreams and what the moon foretold
   In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
   In fact, some people were assured
   in Finland.]
   In former years thus did not I
   In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!
   In her affairs ne’er interfered,
   In her friends’ albums, time had been,
   In history he took no pleasure,
   In hopes of everlasting fame
   In horror for itself alone,
   In idleness and tranquil joy
   in lieu of the forced labour or in consideration of being
   In life domestic see a string
   In little maidens of thirteen?
   In love’s campaigns Onéguine heard
   In love adventures she was versed,
   In love, although its tempests vex,
   In melancholy loveliness,
   In monsters and fair dames was rich;
   In motley and amusing chase.
   In my young days of wild delight
   In Olga’s album, youthful maid,
   In Olga’s face no life’s displayed.
   In one great shout: she’s mine! she’s mine!
   In one he doth accounts behold,
   In one of thine enchanting lays
   In one thing really did excel.
   In order due the maidens pull;
   In pages of a love narration
   In Russ her love made manifest,
   In scarlet cap revolving glides.
   In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
   In scenes like these it may be though,
   In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
   In silence shall I sit and yawn
   In snow she sinks up to the knee;
   In solid, unpretentious style,
   In solitude or worldly din,
   In spite of common sense we’re wont
   In springtime on the meadows green,
   In such an album with delight
   In the broad meadow a gay rout,
   in the fields with their infant husbands in their arms. The
   In the first place, say, am I right?
   In the French language perfectly,
   In the meantime her spirit sinks,
   In this case quite mistaken was.
   In this the love of the fair sex
   In three weeks would arrive for them;
   In thy imagination warm,
   In times gone by thy bare command—”
   In true interpretation hates:
   In truth he had the happy trick
   In whispers low the neighbours said:
   In winter by its blank and dim
   In winter on the fender bright,
   In winter, when Night longer holds
   In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
   Incessantly his chains to break.”
   Incited by his stormy Muse
   Indifferent he became to all,
   Indites an inconsiderate scroll
   inducement lay in the fact that the “tiaglo” (see previous
   Infallibly you there will find
   inferior Russian newspaper of the day, much scoffed at by
   Inheritor of all his race.
   Inseparable from our lot;
   Inseparable soon they be.
   Inside clink glasses, cries resound
   Inspired by whom this tenderness,
   Inspired him with disgust and so
   Instructed jestingly the boy,
   Into delicious bondage gave
   Into the cups already sped
   Into the district then to boot
   into the head-gear.]
   Introduce verse in conversation.
   is “Doushenka,” “The Darling,” a composition somewhat in
   is a species of thick pelisse worn over the “sarafan,” or
   Is ever ready to proclaim
   Is ever ready with relief,
   Is full of frigid jealousy,
   Is it not true? the objects fair,
   Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
   Is no more cherished amongst men.
   Is occupied with Olga fair,
   is responsible to Government, may be paid. The abuse of early
   Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
   Is still condemned in love to be;
   is therein praised as the best of companions “beside the
   Is waning. Yonder valley deep
   Istomina(*) the nimbly-bounding;
   It carries of antiquity
   It gradually possessed his mind;
   It is called by the natives “doushegreika,” that is to say,
   It matters not. Hope e’en to these
   It may be ye were born, or there
   It now to investigate is time,
   It occupied him from a boy,
   It wakens in my breast again.
   It whiled his idle hours away
   It will be by a mob beset
   Its driver seated on the rim
   Its ebullition foaming white
   Its insignificance I know
   IV
   IV
   IV
   IV
   IV
   IX
   IX
   IX
   IX
   IX
   _Jacob Borissovitch Kniajnine_ (1742-91), a clever adapter of
   Jew,” a romance by Geo. Croly.]
   Jilted—glad of a holiday.
   Journeys and warriors to wed.
   Judge then what roses would be ours,
   Just at that time his father died,
   Just at the hour we designate
   Just before dinner-time he slept,
   Just manages a feeble trot
   Just placed the entrance door ajar.
   Just so! that modest swain is blest
   “kashourka,” or “kitten song,” indicates approaching marriage. It
   _Katènine_ translated Corneille’s tragedies into Russian.
   Keep your accounts! You’d rather not?
   Kept lingering on as loath to go,
   Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,(*)
   Knew not an iamb from a choree,
   _Kvass_ is of various sorts: there is the common _kvass_ of
   _Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
   _kvass_ of the restaurants, iced and flavoured with various fruits.
   L
   ‘La Morale est dans la nature des choses.’—Necker
   labouring classes.]
   Laid down his life of sun and storm
   Landscapes thereon he would design,
   Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
   larger villages, which alone could support such an individual,
   Late in the afternoon to rise,
   Latin is just now not in vogue,
   Lay languishing both day and night—
   Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
   Learn to possess more self-control.
   “leleyat” to fondle or soothe, likewise with our own word
   Lenski as a good match received,—
   Lenski at intervals would dare,
   Lenski his pencil-case took out
   Lenski unto the dame replied,
   “Leonora,” which has found so many English translators. Not
   Lessons to give he understood!
   Lest jaded with satiety,
   Lest the malicious reader or
   Let me present ye to the man,
   letters. These consisted of the _Arzamass_, or French school, to
   LI
   Life lies extended, vast and bright,
   LII
   LIII
   Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
   Like down from Aeolus’s lip,
   Like him renouncing vanity,
   Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
   Like his, her dress was always nice,
   (Like other things I could relate)
   Like Venus when, capriciously,
   Likewise an epitaph with tears
   List! the snow crunches—he draws nigh!
   Listen to me without disdain.
   Listless is she the livelong day
   LIV
   Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
   Lo! my Onéguine free as air,
   Lo! my Onéguine rural lord!
   Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
   Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
   Lofty the chambers one and all,
   Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
   Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
   Long time her young imagination
   Longer the East inert reclines
   Look through the window and kill flies.
   Looms gray behind the mist and morn
   loose character by Jean Baptiste Louvet de Couvray, b. 1760,
   Lost in the hamlet far away.
   “Lovage,” the _Levisticum officinalis_, is a hardy plant growing
   Love’s pangs Tattiana agonize.
   Love to idealize inclined;
   Love to inspire doth woe appear
   Love, flowers, the country, idleness
   lyric poet of some originality and talent. The “Feasts” is
   Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
   Madame Krudener. The frequent mention in the course of this
   Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
   maiden loses her lover in the wars; she murmurs at Providence
   maiden to elope. Instead of riding to a church or bridal chamber
   Make up your mind to go there.”—“Ah!
   Malek Adel and De Linar,(31)
   Man—forty years long in this wise—
   Many an ancient legend which
   Marat and Danton.]
   marriages was regulated by Tsar Nicholas.]
   matin dans sa chambre, je le trouvais brossant ses ongles avec
   matins à brosser ses ongles peut bien passer quelques instants à
   May be that I by heaven’s decrees
   May be the empire of the sense,
   May be, and this my terror wakes,
   may thus be discovered.]
   May well in innocence impart.
   May yet be studious of his nails;
   Me your perfections would not bless;
   “Me?”—“Yes! It is Tattiana’s fête
   Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
   meaning of the passage is therefore: his earthly marriage
   Meantime I’ll finish whilst I can
   Meantime in matutinal dress
   Meantime Onéguine’s apparition
   Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
   (_Mechanically_, let us add),
   Men become friends from idleness.
   Men love no more, as only the
   Merciful God, what will he deem?”
   Metreless verses recognizing
   [Mikhailovskoe, 1825]
   Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
   “Mine!” cried Eugene with savage tone.
   “Minor” (Niedorosl). Prince Potemkin, after witnessing it,
   Minutely I will now portray.
   Misunderstanding, words and blows.
   Modest yet daring! And a tear
   moi, qui n’en croyait rien, je commençai de le croire, non
   Moina recalls for this alone
   Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
   “Monsieur l’Abbé” a starving Gaul,
   Morality taught scarce at all;
   More crimson every moment they.
   More satisfaction to her taste.
   More swift the room Tattiana fled,
   More troublesome than usual?”—“No!
   Morning’s forerunners, breezes blow
   Morning awakes with joyous sound;
   Mortally sick I am indeed.
   Most by this circumstance offended
   Most usually a Cossack horse
   Mushrooms for winter salted down,
   Must e’en despise his kind at last;
   Must now my stanzas occupy.
   Must take a walk and rest a bit—
   Must visit them. Come! you must own,
   Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
   mutilated Dante’s famous line.]
   Mutual repulsion and ennui,
   My beauty, thou art ready too.
   “My chum lives here,” Bruin grunts out.
   My country’s honour and repute
   My country and an exile’s lot;
   “My darling child, thou art in pain.—
   “My darling, growing old am I!
   My doom has been pronounced on high,
   My famous portrait indicate
   My friend, ’tis but to pay a debt,
   My friends, what means this odd digression?
   My goddesses, where are your shades?
   My gratitude do not disdain,
   My guardian angel to the grave.
   My heart’s allegiance can resign,
   “My heart’s delight, thou art not well.”—
   My heart of old would captivate.
   My heart with but one look revive;
   My heroine, Tattiana dear.
   My joy in youth was fleeting e’en
   My light productions to retain,
   My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
   My morning birdie, yesternight
   My mother-in-law who lately died(34)
   My mournful fate in verse to weave,
   My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
   My soul I cannot renovate—
   My spirit with such pangs before.
   My sum of happiness contained;
   My tongue is somewhat rusty now.
   “My uncle’s goodness is extreme,
   My unpretending page shall fill,
   My venerated reader, oh!
   My verses, kindly meant, would earn
   My very latest composition!
   My wretched Lenski’s fate I mourn,
   Mysteriously all objects near
   Nay! even as this instant fled,
   Ne’er touched her fingers indolent
   Ne’er trusted to the treacherous ace.
   Nearer they come—Eugene appears!
   Nearest and dearest knew not how
   Next Saturday. The Làrina
   Night separated from her spouse,
   Nights, which extend from Christmas to Twelfth Night, for
   No answer all that day was borne.
   No fond illusions live to soothe,
   No greater pleasure can exist
   “No misery I see in that”—
   No more at dawn the shepherd will
   No more the music thunders loud,
   No more with pale Diana’s rays,(17)
   No one appeared to lend a hand.
   No one my anguish comprehends,
   No other book had time to read.
   No other than Onéguine mine.
   No time to pick it up! afraid,
   No trace ye left in passing by
   No, never in the early blaze
   None, be my witness Heaven above!
   (Nonsense and pure absurdity,
   Nor at the hour of noon with sound
   Nor beauties of far distant lands
   Nor boston nor the world’s affairs
   Nor by her beauty she became
   Nor by her sister’s brilliancy
   Nor dares the skirting of her dress
   Nor did her blushes fade away,
   Nor discontinued to distress
   Nor doth my absent pen portray
   Nor frigid adulation paid.
   Nor further comment that night made.
   Nor homage which the Muse demands
   Nor in his dreams anticipates
   Nor interest in aught betrays.
   Nor long his mind was agitated
   Nor marked how summer’s prime had fled
   Nor on the letter yet hath she
   Nor shall my pen paint terribly
   Nor slander viciously could spread
   Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
   Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
   Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
   Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
   Nor years of separation all
   Not a bad fellow was her father
   Not all will like myself proceed—
   “Not at all.”—“That I can’t conceive!
   Not daring to cast back her eyes.
   “Not in the least, assured am I!”—
   not of equal merit.
   Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
   Not that she had his works perused,
   [Note 10: _Denis Von Wisine_ (1741-92), a favourite Russian
   [Note 11: In Russia large fires are lighted in winter time in front
   [Note 12: “Tout le monde sut qu’il (Grimm) mettait du blanc; et
   [Note 13: Refers to Dictionary of the Academy, compiled during the
   [Note 14: _Elvine_, or _Elvina_, was not improbably the owner of the
   [Note 15: i.e. the milkmaid from the Okhta villages, a suburb of St.
   [Note 16: Apropos of this somewhat ungallant sentiment, a Russian
   [Note 17: The midsummer nights in the latitude of St. Petersburg
   [Note 18: Refers to Mouravieff’s “Goddess of the Neva.” At St.
   [Note 19:
   [Note 1: _Ruslan and Liudmila_, the title of Pushkin’s first
   [Note 20: The strong influence exercised by Byron’s genius on the
   [Note 21: The poet was, on his mother’s side, of African extraction,
   [Note 22: Refers to two of the most interesting productions of
   [Note 23: The _barshtchina_ was the corvée, or forced labour
   [Note 24: The neighbours complained of Onéguine’s want of courtesy.
   [Note 25: From the lay of the _Russalka_, i.e. mermaid of the Dnieper.]
   [Note 26: The Russian annotator remarks: “The most euphonious
   [Note 27: The foregoing stanza requires explanation. Russian
   [Note 28: A play upon the word “venetz,” crown, which also
   [Note 29: The fortress of Otchakoff was taken by storm on the
   [Note 2: Written in Bessarabia.]
   [Note 30: “Svetlana,” a short poem by Joukóvski, upon which his
   [Note 31: The heroes of two romances much in vogue in Pushkin’s
   [Note 32: Referring to Richardson’s “Clarissa Harlowe,” “La
   [Note 33: “Melmoth,” a romance by Maturin, and “Jean Sbogar,” by
   [Note 34: A young married couple amongst Russian peasants
   [Note 35: Marriages amongst Russian serfs used formerly to
   [Note 36: Courtships were not unfrequently carried on in the
   [Note 37: It is thus that I am compelled to render a female
   [Note 38: A Russian annotator complains that the poet has
   [Note 39: It is well known that until the reign of the late Tsar
   [Note 3: In Russia foreign tutors and governesses are commonly
   [Note 40: The “Blago-Namièrenni,” or “Well-Wisher,” was an
   [Note 41: Hippolyte Bogdanovitch—b. 1743, d. 1803—though
   [Note 42: Parny—a French poet of the era of the first Napoleon,
   [Note 43: Evgeny Baratynski, a contemporary of Pushkin and a
   [Note 44: The _samovar_, i.e. “self-boiler,” is merely an
   [Note 45: Count Tolstoy, a celebrated artist who subsequently
   [Note 46: Yazykoff, a poet contemporary with Pushkin. He was
   [Note 47: The Abbé de Pradt: b. 1759, d. 1837. A political
   [Note 48: The “kibitka,” properly speaking, whether on wheels
   [Note 49: The allusions in the foregoing stanza are in the first
   [Note 4: Referring to Tomi, the reputed place of exile of Ovid.
   [Note 50: The Russian clergy are divided into two classes:
   [Note 51: Refers to the “Sviatki” or Holy Nights between Christmas
   [Note 52: During the “sviatki” it is a common custom for the girls
   [Note 53: The superstition is that the name of the future husband
   [Note 54: See Note 30.]
   [Note 55: Lel, in Slavonic mythology, corresponds to the Morpheus
   [Note 5: _Les Aventures du Chevalier de Faublas_, a romance of a
   [Note 6: A la “Bolivar,” from the founder of Bolivian independence.]
   [Note 7: M. Bréguet, a celebrated Parisian watchmaker—hence a
   [Note 8: Talon, a famous St. Petersburg restaurateur.]
   [Note 9: Paul Petròvitch Kaverine, a friend for whom Pushkin in
   note) received an additional lot of the communal land for
   [Note: Istomina—A celebrated Circassian dancer of the day, with
   [Note: Mikhailovskoe, 1825-6]
   [Note: Odessa and Mikhailovskoe, 1824.]
   [Note: Odessa, December 1823.]
   [Note: Stanza left unfinished by the author.]
   [Note: The serfs destined for military service used to have
   “Nothing, good nurse, there’s nothing wrong,
   Nought from his pen did ever flow,
   Nouvelle Heloise,” and Madame de Stael’s “Delphine.”]
   November at the gate did stand.
   Now a long branch itself entwined
   Now all things round about repeat
   Now Didelot scarce can be endured!”
   Now don’t be cross with me, my soul,
   Now her lithe form she arches o’er
   Now I am ready to refuse.
   Now it is ready to be sent—
   Now talkative, now reticent;
   Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
   Now with what eager interest
   “Nurse, ’tis so close I cannot rest.
   “Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
   O’er all a sheet of silvery dust
   O’erspread with Winter’s carpet bright,
   O Brenta, once more we shall meet
      O my Svetlana.’—Joukóvski
   “O Rus!”—Horace
   O ye whom tender love hath pained
   Obedient she had ever been
   Obedient to the magic strings,
   Obedient to warm Spring’s commands.
   Obeyed the impulses of heart?—
   Obsequious or indifferent!
   occasions.]
   occur to most that the apologist of the Russian fair “doth
   Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
   of 1861 by the serfs to their lord.
   Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
   Of Africa, ancestral land,(21)
   Of censure for the same incurred;
   Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
   Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
   Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
   Of course Tattiana was annoyed
   Of creditors a hungry rout
   Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
   Of dreary Russia left behind,
   Of error and the passions’ strife.
   Of every sort and every set!”—
   Of fiery youth’s untutored days
   Of fleeting glory take no heed.
   Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
   Of friends unceremonious would
   Of frivolous existence, friends;
   of general in the Russian service.]
   Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
   Of harmony enshrining thought.
   Of horn in circle call them round.
   Of keen sarcastic intellect
   Of late I have been quite absurd,—
   Of love again, and yet again;
   Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
   Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
   of Malines.]
   Of many an economic scheme;
   Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
   Of my impassioned heroine.
   Of Olga he in song averred;
   Of one thing till again we met.
   Of passion they so often raise.
   Of pictures painful harrowing,
   Of roses to romancers dear;
   Of rural life the sluggish stream;
   Of Russian domesticity;
   Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
   Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
   Of sunset glow with rosy light,
   Of tender years the modesty
   Of the Æneid, but incorrect.
   of the approaching conquest of Britain by Napoleon, and
   of the bride and bridegroom during the ceremony. The literal
   Of the commencement of the piece.
   Of the domains of the side-scene.
   Of the horizon she is like!”—
   of the knight-errant Ruslan in search of his fair lady Liudmila, who
   of the Latins. The word is evidently connected with the verb
   Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
   Of the night sentinels arise
   Of the romances she preferred,
   of the theatres for the benefit of the menials, who, considering
   Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
   of three days per week rendered previous to the emancipation
   Of touching lightly every theme.
   Of untold gain she must conceal,
   of useless drones for whom Peter the Great felt such a deep
   Of what not, and of distant dim,
   Of whirligigs were very fond,
   Of widow Clicquot or Moet
   Oft staring through the window pane
   Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
   often without going through the form of acknowledging the
   “Oh! nurse, nurse, you don’t understand!
   Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
   “Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
   Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
   Oh! who is not calumnious?
   ‘Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
   Old age through spectacles too peers,
   Old people’s simple conversations
   Olga’s admirer came that day:
   Olga the tea must supervise—
   Omens inspired her soul with fear,
   Onéguine’s letter!”—“Ah! the thing!
   Onéguine’s speeches I abhorred
   Onéguine acted very well
   Onéguine knew enough, the rogue
   Onéguine lightning glances shot;
   Onéguine meditative stood,
   Onéguine oped the cupboards wide.
   Onéguine sat the table by
   Onéguine then approached and said:
   Onéguine was—so many deemed
   Onéguine was a citizen
   Onéguine, O my gentle readers,
   On balls I madly used to dote,
   On fresh allurements they are bent,
   On guests their servants used to wait
   On him spleen mounted sentinel
   On horseback every day they ride—
   On horseback gallop o’er the steppe!
   On innocent delights I dote,
   On Lenski’s matrimonial fate
   On melted wax in water poured;
   On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
   On raptures, sorrows not her own,
   On sunny days the glistening rime,
   On the dull stage find all things changed,
   On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
   On this artistical retreat
   On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
   On unknown female forms he throws.
   On waves by tempests curdled o’er!
   On winters of the south a skit,
   Once more to idleness consigned,
   (One and the same thing it may be)
   One image occupied his mind,
   One instrument for his own use—
   One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
   only, as it is believed that agriculture in the north is so
   Open the window—sit by me.”
   Opened the portals of the tomb
   Opened with care, and entering bore
   or “nyets”—the final s being a contraction of “sudar” or
   Or a professor in tulle cap.
   Or a swift hare from mead to mead
   Or a swift meteor, may be,
   Or at a promenade mayhap,
   Or better,—like a faithful wife.
   Or Bogdanovitch’s sweet lays.(41)
   Or bosom full of languid fire,—
   Or by a card our homage pay,
   Or by the ocean’s rocky shore.
   Or counting on his uncle’s death
   Or couplets more ingenious still;
   Or else (I deal not here in jokes),
   Or even, silent and resigned,
   Or ice and flame, are not diverse
   Or into bold hands anxiously
   Or kiss the border of her dress.
   Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
   Or quietly partake our woe.
   or runners, is a vehicle with a hood not unlike a big cradle.]
   Or that adoring Grandison
   Or the delivery of a note.
   Or the mysterious Sbogar.(33)
   Or to disturb my dreams approach
   Or torturer malevolent?
   Or vainly ’mid luxurious fare
   Or will my melancholy glance
   Or, after dinner’s dull repast,
   Or, as it were, the Freischutz’ score
   Or, parable more flattering,
   Or, with a pen and colours fit,
   orders during the Carnival. At other times it is difficult
   Oriental charm which so much captivated Madame de Stael.” It will
   Original imagination,
   Our fathers used to dote upon;
   Our hero stops and doth alight,
   Our heroes at full gallop sped,
   Our liberty at least survives:
   Our tender dreamer had enrolled
   Our union would produce but grief.
   Ourselves as unities to count;
   Outside descend the mists of night.
   Ovid thus enumerates the causes which brought about his banishment:
                        _Ovidii Nasonis Tristium_, lib. ii. 207.]
   own title, and also written a poem “Liudmila” in imitation of it.
   _Ozeroff_, one of the best-known Russian dramatists of the
   Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
   Pallid and melancholy face,
   pamphleteer of the French Revolution: was at first an emigre,
   pancakes or “blinni” are consumed vigorously by the lower
   Pardon I ask for such a sin—
   Park, garden, palings, yard below
   Passes the torrent But alack!
   Past darkened windows and long streets
   peasants, in order that the taxes, for which the whole Commune
   Pedantic although scholar like,
   Pen, paper bring: the table too
   pension from Napoleon, Parny forthwith proceeded to damage
   Perchance he will to all the three.
   Perchance one more affectionate.
   Perchance some heart ’twill agitate,
   Perchance they laurels also cull—
   Perchance upon the Neva e’en
   Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
   Perchance you also soon may burn,
   Perched on a goose’s neck a skull
      “Perdiderint quum me _duo_ crimina, carmen et error,
   period; he possessed more originality than Kniajnine. “Œdipus
   Perish absorbed by Lethe’s stream.
   Permit me; is it worth the trouble
   permitted to exercise a trade or profession elsewhere. Very
   Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
   pessni,” or “dish songs” before mentioned. These are popularly
   Petersburg on the right bank of the Neva chiefly inhabited by the
   Petersburg the banks of the Neva are lined throughout with
   Phials of crystal scents enclose.
   Philosopher just turned eighteen.
   phrase. “Podbliudni pessni,” are literally “dish songs,” or
   place to a poem entitled “The First Snow,” by Prince Viazemski
   Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
   poem of romances once enjoying a European celebrity but now
   Poetic transport did infuse,
   Poetic transport. They impart
   Polite demeanour to preserve,
   “Poor Yorick,” mournfully he said,
   popularity amongst his countrymen is a fact familiar to all.]
   Portray the solitary den
   Possess my love and sympathy.
   Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
   possessing considerable poetical talent was like many other
   Pour on this orb a dazzling light
   Pray is it not a tough affair
   Present me.”—“You are joking.”—“No.”—
   Presentiments oppressed her heart.
   Presents her quarto amiably,
   Preserves and an eternal prattle
   priests, and the black who inhabit the monasteries, furnish
   proceeds to vocal music.
   Profiles of lovely dames he knows
   pronounced entirely original, though its intrinsic beauty is
   protest too much.” The poet in all probability wrote the offending
   Proud of his dinners and his wife!
   Providence at length loses patience and sends her lover’s spirit,
   Providence otherwise may deem—
   purposes of divination. Reference will again be made to this
   Pursues phantasmagoria vain.
   Pushkin, then residing in Bessarabia, was in the same predicament
   _Qu’ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
   Quite a sensation; the position
   Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
   Raises within my breast as oft
   (Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
   Rebuffed—as quickly reassured,
   Recent instructions of its mother.
   Recovering, Tania gazes round;
   Reduced with effort unto sense,
   _refined eulogy_ of the excellent qualities of our countrywomen.
   Regained authority awhile,
   reign of Catherine II under the supervision of Lomonossoff.]
   Rekindled in my withered heart
   Relate some ancient history.”
   relative rank and precedence to the members of the various
   Remained with him the youthful maid.
   Removed her to his country seat,
   remplir de blanc les creux de sa peau.”
   Repentance wields not now her spell
   Replace the visions fancy drew;
   repugnance.]
   Rescue me from oblivion.
   reside in the house of the bridegroom’s father till the
   Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
   Retained the image, though short-lived,
   Reviews both dress and countenance,
   ring. The first-named lines foreshadow death; the latter, the
   Rings from a dish of water full
   Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
   Romance of love I pray refer,
   Romances pleased her from the first,
   Rooted unto the spot remained.
   Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
   Rousseau, I would remark in passing,(12)
   Rural Life
   Russia’s Terpsichore review
   Russian authors more remarkable for successful imitation
   Russian ladies unite in their persons great acquirements,
   Sailed silently in unison—
   Sails her allotted course on high,
   Salguir is a river of the Crimea.]
   _samovar_.]
   Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
   Satan will jest, and at love’s cost.
   _Saturday Review_ of the 2d August 1879.]
   “Say, of the two which was Tattiana?”
   Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
   Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
   Scarcely in Russia can ye find
   Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
   scholiast remarks:—“The whole of this ironical stanza is but a
   scientific and educational. The military and naval grades from
   Scissors both straight and curved as well,
   Seated, a curious look with glasses
   Secret excursions made in sleighs;
   seductive feet apostrophized by the poet, since, in 1816, he wrote
   Seductive, animated, bright,
   Seeing in this no deprivation,
   seem to assume this virtue if they have it not, and we take their
   Seems so unnatural and absurd:
   Serious endeavours to assure
   Servant of God and brigadier,
   Serve who could neither read nor write.
   seulement par l’embellissement de son teint, et pour avoir trouvé
   Shaking with serious air the head,
   Shall abdicate the bard’s profession,
   Shall I your chorus hear anew,
   Shall my declining years beguile;
   Shall surely, be it soon or late,
   Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
   Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
   She cannot—Eugene oped the door
   She cannot—then impatiently
   She cannot draw a breath or stir.
   She deemed its outline might afford.
   She did not think “procrastination
   She dreamt she journeyed o’er a field
   She drinks in those seductive deeds!
   She fears and like an arrow rushes
   She from the winter corn espies
   She heard of servant-maids the note,
   She hears of conversation nought
   She hears the bear behind her press,
   She heaves a sigh and deep intent
   She is an angel! We sometime
   She loved upon the balcony
   She murmurs in an undertone
   She ne’er repeated unto hers.
   She nerves herself from her alarm
   She never of deception dreamed
   She oped her eyes and cried: ’tis he!
   She peeped through a chink of the door.
   She runs, the bear upon her trail,
   She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
   She sank.—
   She seeks the garden in her need—
   She soon forgot, began to call
   She strains her throat to force a cry—
   She struggled hard at first thus pent,
   She the delicious novel reads,
   She trembled and grew deadly pale.
   She waited for—I don’t know whom!
   She waits, on fire her trembling frame—
   She was thus fond of Richardson
   “She who with melancholy face
   She wore her corset tightly bound,
   She would pronounce _à la Française_;
   She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
   Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
   Shone pungent Satire’s dauntless king,
   Should be respected throughout life
   Should dearly like a dance again.
   Shouts of applause! Onéguine passes
   Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,(44)
   Shy, silent did the maid appear
   Sighs on another than her lord
   signifies a nimbus or glory, and is the symbol of marriage
   Silent, oracular ye’d see him
   Silk tapestry upon the wall,
   Silvers the brook; the shepherd’s horn
   _Simeonova_, a celebrated tragic actress, who retired from
   Similar dames ye may have seen.
   Since Eugene in that solitude
   Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
   Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
   Singing God knows what maid admired,
   Singing in chorus all the while.
   Singing inside her hut the maid
   Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
   skill or accomplishments, or who had amassed wealth; and
   slang term for a watch.]
   Sledging, the snows, which at the time
   Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
   Slow circling round its fellow swings
   Slowly exhausted by desire,
   Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
   Snorts, and his rider bends his course
   So ancient warriors, battles o’er,
   So ardently did I desire
   So full of piety, correct,
   So hearken, every worthy spouse,
   So inaccessible to men,
   So irremissible appear?
   So let us to the ball-room haste,
   So many neighbours here exist—
   So meantime let him joyous live
   So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit—
   So prudent, and so circumspect
   So she her silken sash unlaced,
   So she in French herself expressed.
   So uncongenial to my mind,
   Sombre or glad in turn to be,
   Some a mazurka occupies,
   Some army poet therein may
   Some day I’ll somehow finish it.
   Some future ignoramus shall
   Some nice instructive novel read,
   Some one or other editor
   Some wretched journal in his hand;
   Sometime collected, shall relate
   Sometimes by pleasing flattery’s art,
   Sometimes by ready-made despair;
   “Song and dance,” the well-known “khorovod,” in which the dance
   songs used with dishes (of water) during the “sviatki” or Holy
   Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
   Sorrow to counterfeit and wail—
   Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
   source of inspiration. Even the poem in question cannot be
   Spanned the unbridled torrent o’er;
   Spare yourself unavailing pain
   Spared him not their asperities.
   Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
   Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
   splendid granite quays.]
   Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
   St. Petersburg.]
   stanza in a fit of Byronic “spleen,” as he would most likely
   Stately, devoid of prejudice,
   Still everywhere, without, within,
   Still happier he who ne’er hath known!
   Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
   Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
   Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
   Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
   Stood as estranged from all aloof,
   Straight for the entrance then he made
   Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
   Strange unto her each childish game,
   Strictly the Carnival observed,
   Striking the intellect with awe
   Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o’er.
   styled “monsieur” or “madame.”]
   Submissive as if in a swoon,
   Subscribed, _toujours à vous, Annette;_
   successful conclusion and become matter of history. A good
   Such am I. This did ye expect,
   Such is the country custom good;
   Such open-hearted innocence.
   Such was Onéguine’s sainted life,
   Such were the musings of Eugene.
   “sudarinia,” i.e. sir or madam.]
   Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
   Suddenly to the left hand side,
   Suitable for this semi-Russian.
   summoned the author, and greeted him with the exclamation,
   superstitious practice, which is not confined to Russia. See Note 52.
   supposed to indicate the fortunes of the immediate holder of the
   Surely ye all have overhauled
   “Svetlana” has been translated by Sir John Bowring.]
   “sviatki” or Holy Nights (see Canto V. st. x), and the dreamer
   Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
   Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
   system, might lead to great abuses.]
   Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
   take place at ridiculously early ages. Haxthausen asserts
   Take to their wings and fly away.
   Tania doth by the casement linger
   tastes, see his poem of “Angelo,” founded upon “Measure for Measure.”]
   Tattiana’s beauty, pale with care,
   Tattiana’s letter I possess,
   Tattiana’s Letter to Onéguine
   Tattiana’s love was quite sincere,
   Tattiana (nurse the project planned)
   Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick—
   Tattiana certainly infers
   Tattiana courage doth regain
   Tattiana doth accept his aid;
   Tattiana faltered, and became
   Tattiana gazed with curious eye
   Tattiana gazes on the moon,
   Tattiana in despair unfeigned
   Tattiana in the yard appears
   Tattiana in traditions old
   Tattiana moans and now she sighs
   Tattiana more than ever burned
   Tattiana motionless abides.
   Tattiana o’er the stream complained;
   Tattiana through the forest erred,
   Tattiana to a corner, bids
   Tattiana waits. No answer came!
   Tattiana was her appellation.
   Tattiana with impatience waited
   Tattiana would attempt to fly,
   Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
   Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
   Tattiana, Russian to the core,
   Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?”—
   Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
   “Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?”
   Tend not my heart to mitigate,
   Terrible tales she loved to hear.
   Terror assails her. Hastily
   18th December 1788 by a Russian army under Prince Potemkin.
   than for original genius. His most remarkable production
   Than one’s own fascinating self.
   than the late Mr. Thomas Carlyle. The decadence of Richardson’s
   That a friend’s arm in every case
   That afterwards with evil smile
   That all may hear his voice’s tone.
   That bilberry wine, I’m sore afraid,
   That chosen heroes consecrate,
   That glimmered through the radiant night
   That guests approach: and when above
   That Heaven her character had blent
   That hero, though his merit shone,
   That is, he could elucidate
   That like a friendly voice its tone
   That rascal Lovelace she abused;
   that strong hearty peasant women were to be seen at work
   That until Christmas comes again
   That vicious set whom I don’t blame—
   That year the autumn season late
   The “in memoriam” pages sought,
   the “Nestor of the Arzamass” belonged, and their opponents who
   the 14th up to the 7th confer personal nobility only, whilst
   The _obrok_ was a species of poll-tax paid by a serf, either
   The accents wild of other’s woes,
   The aged nurse in ample gown,(37)
   The aged woman in her woe:
   The all-entrancing joys of love—
   The amatory science warm,
   The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
   The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
   The artful prisoner should seek
   The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
   The bath on Saturdays attended,
   The bays of age and helplessness.
   The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
   the best known of his tragedies.
   The body they consigned to rest,
   The boy was wild but full of grace.
   The break of day she doth not see,
   The bridegroom sage without delay
   The bridge and alley to the lake,
   The captives of the Salguir’s shore.(22)
   The child of sloth and liberty.
   The china teapot too ye might
   The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
   The clue unto some mystery
   The cold reply with gloomy mien
   The contact of the foot I raised
   The conversation tedious
   The converse of our hermits twain,
   The cool dark oaken grove to range,
   The Country Damsel
   The country hath its liberties
      The country whereunto a mournful age thee sent.
   The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
   The crafty spouse caressed him, who
   The credulous indeed are blest,
   The crowd and merriment and light,
   The curse of commonplace delight.
   The curtain now they slowly raise.
   The cynosure of every eye.
   The days of love and of romance!
   The days which to your youth belong?
   The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
   The deuce with my inside has played.”
   The disenchanted glass direct
   The drama of my youth was played.(10)
   The drive becomes monotonous—
   The drum already doth arouse.
   The dusty chronicles of earth
   The early days of life we sought.
   The easier ’tis to gain her grace,
   The epitaph on marble shows:
   The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
   The evanescent fashions fly
   The excited hero in a trice
   The Fête
   The fair of the next generation,
   The fair, nor parted with regret,
   “The family are all quite well—
   The fashionable rhymester’s heart!
   The fatal hour had come at last—
   The fatal secrets of the grave,
   The fated nutriment desired;
   The father scarcely understands
   The feeble moment would espy
   The feet of graceful ladies fly,
   The fervid poet would recite,
   The final two lines refer to the “Tchin,” or Russian social
   The fire of the nocturnal lights;
   The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
   The fires of passion and its smart—
   The firmament in mellow light,
   The first appearance of the snows
   The first bright wreathing storm of snow
   The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
   The forests in mysterious gloom
   The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
   The friend of liberty and laws
   The frolics of maidens.
   The fruits of learning and combined
   The fruits of science, evil, good,
   The German baker looks around
   The giddy world at last shall see.
   The gifted songster never swerved,
   The girl in marriage they unite.
   The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
   The goblet still is bubbling bright—
   The God of Love is after you!
   The goddess would a masquerade
   The golden ember now enshrines,
   The gossip of their ladies fair.
   The gulf between them was so vast,
   The happiest days of life employ?
   The heart of the inveterate flirt!
   The height of fashion, fitting tight,
   The hero’s name too in advance,
   The hero is of my narration!
   The hero we immortalize.
   the high dignitaries of the Church, and constitute that swarm
   The horizon luminous doth grow,
   The hostess doth interrogate:
   The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
   The idols of their adoration
   The image of her seal impressed.
   The imagination to enliven
   The inscription o’er the gates of Hell
   The insensate fire of love still glowed
   The kennel or a kindred line,
   The Làrinas would celebrate,
   The ladies’ laughter to provoke.
   The ladies, their fantastic dress,
   The lamps illuminating shine;
   The language of her girlish pleading
   The last poor obol I was worth—
   The laws of generations past,
   The less we love a lady fair
   The letter is the thing, you see,—
   The letter which Tattiana wrote.
   The lonely mansion-house to screen
   “The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!”—
   The Lord deliver her and save!
   The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
   The Lovelaces are out of date,
   The Maidens’ Song
   The malady of hopeless love
   The manners of the highest class
   the married women, on the other hand, in two, which are twisted
   The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
   The matter did not agitate,
   The Medal Otchakoff conferred!(29)
   The medium is required of gold.
   The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
   The moderns of the ancients rave—
   The monsters of the British Muse
   The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
   The moon, the stars, and shining night—
   The morn arises foggy, cold,
   The most industrious man alive
   The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
   The Muse appeared, when love passed by
   The mystic lines to tear away
   The mystic monogram, O. E.
   The native Russian tongue impeach?
   The natural fickleness of passion,
   The needle nor, o’er framework bent,
   The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
   The new moon’s crescent slim she spied,
   The nightingale trills forth her tune;
   The nights of golden Italy
   The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,(15)
   The olden time shall be my theme.
   The pains of night have wholly fled,
   The passage containing the reference to the three tears and
   The passionate speeches I’ll repeat,
   The path of hope and tender fear—
   The path which leads to glory’s goal.
   The peasant blessed his happy fate.
   _The peasants there are rich as kings,
   The pervert world with icy chill
   The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.
   The poet’s fervid conversation
   The Poet
   the poet. The former line indicates the _Prisoner of the
   The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
   “The post hath kept him, it is like.”
   The prejudices all men have,
   The principal outlines of these three poems are as follows: A
   The proud ones are not worth the fire
   The riot of the world and glare
   The Russian language I deem vile
   The Russian N with nasal sound
   The Russian peasants are childishly fond of whirligigs, which
   the Russian poet has directly paraphrased “Leonora” under its
   The Russian winter did adore
   The sad moon only could remark.
   The same warm vision constantly;
   The secrets of maidens.
   The secrets of the marriage state
   The servants used to congregate
   The shining orbs of night appear;
   The shining river clothed in ice;
   The shopman and the pedlar rise
   The shutters open; to the skies
   The silent fields no peasant nears,
   The sleep-compelling Grandison,
   The sneers of critics superfine;
   The sorrows of a single state.
   The speech of man and tramp of horse.
   the stage in early life and married a Prince Gagarine.
   The starry beacons fade away,
   the state of the thermometer, cannot be said to have a jovial
   The steed benumbed still pawing stands
   The steward sent a note to tell
   The story of his young love’s dream,
   The story of thy life and fate.
   The style in which my hero dressed;
   the style of La Fontaine’s “Psyche.” Its merit consists in
   The style of wise antiquity.
   The sudden rattling of a car.
   The sum of my existence gone
   The swain of Julia Wolmar,
   The tale of these romantic men;
   The third at night. Tattiana wakes
   The thirst for fame and man’s applause,
   The thunderbolt on you descend!
   The time between the wolf and dogs—
   The tiny sun shone less on high
   The tiresome man, her value knowing,
   The torment born of crime unseen,
   The torrent of opinion,
   The trees in silvery array,
   The triumph of a conquest new.
   The troop of apparitions fled,
   The unbidden guests he roughly chides—
   The uncontaminated kiss
   the unpleasant bridegroom resorts to the graveyard and repairs to
   The untutored spirit’s pangs calmed down
   The very morning of our days.
   The village wherein yawned Eugene
   The voice of jealousy is drowned.
   The votary of vain delight
   The wedding-day had been arranged,
   the white or secular, which is made up of the mass of parish
   The wind rose instantly, blew out
   the Winter Palace to the Summer Palace and Garden.]
   The wit of others to acquire.
   The wolf upon the highways bold
   The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
   The wood she enters—bear behind,—
   The words and looks of charmers sweet
   The workpeople she superintended,
   The works of Mr. Richardson.
   The world is ever altering!
   The young proprietor we find;
   The young Simeonova too there
   “The younger, you’re in love with her!”
   the youth’s head and exclaimed: “Mon cher Tibulle.” He is
   The youthful lover once again
   The youthful poet’s fond confession.
   Thee only would I choose, in truth,
   Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
   Their branches by the snow bowed down.
   Their claims and explanations shout.
   Their coming which no man expects,
   Their giddy sports she ne’er enjoyed.
   Their glory with their heels of red
   Their heroes used to represent
   Their idols they were wont to invest
   Their Jealousy and separation
   Their looks alone produce the spleen.(16)
   their lot, and they bear the cold with a wonderful equanimity.]
   Their memory lingers still and seems
   Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
   Their offspring’s innocent flirtations
   Their own productions, some insist
   Their privileged allurements fire
   “Then amongst strangers I was left—
   Then be it so! My destiny
   Then became busy with the house,
   Then dressed himself...(*)
   Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
   Then it may be, O flattering tale,
   Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
   “Then send your grandson quietly
   Then suddenly discharge a joke
   Then they’re so innocent of vice,
   Then they came easily enow,
   Then to some gallant in your turn
   Then touching Olga they depart
   Then would we muse as in a trance,
   Then, her distraction to allay,
   Then, I say truly, none but thee
   Then, then—well, in some solitude
   There an imperious skeleton;
   There Didelot became glorious,
   There friends of pure delight had been
   There is no fishmarket retort
   There is no path; the storm hath strewn
   There is no stupid calumny
   There jars of cider block the way,
   There long time sad at heart he stayed:
   There our Katènine did revive
   There! take it quickly, if ye must).
   There, aping Gulnare’s bard, he spanned
   There, there, beneath the side-scene’s shade
   These are your relatives, believe:
   These evenings as in days of old
   They are all natural and low,
   They blossom, ripen and they fall
   They crack a feeble joke and smile—
   They disappeared by stealth and guile,
   They growl a bit—they scandalise—
   They have invited you this week.”
   They in a peaceful life preserved
   They long ago had held debate.
   They made him feel inclined to doze;
   They may forget that we exist.
   They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
   They sang, whilst negligently seated,
   They sent their compliments—but oh!
   They shovel silver with a spade,
   They stir the heart as heretofore.
   They will receive us with delight.”
   They wish that ladies should, I hear,
   They would not solemnly debate
   Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
   Thine honour is my countersign!
   Thinking to float upon the stream,
   Thinking: ’tis foolish to disturb
   Thirty thousand Turks are said to have perished during the
   This anchorite amid his waste
   (This by command; for it was found,
   This evanescent boyish bliss.
   This gentle daring who could guess?
   This great discovery relief
   This he believed: a kindred spirit
   This lot in life with stern decree?
   This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
   This northern summer of our own,
   this poem was written literary warfare more or less open was
   This was his social character.
   This wicked, that absurd he deems,
   This world. I do not praise desire,
   Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
   Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
   Those whom we ought to love, caress,
   Thou’lt quaff love’s sweet envenomed stream,
   Thou’lt suffer, dearest, but before,
   Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
   Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
   Thou hast resigned thy destiny
   Though Baratynski verses penned,(45)
   Though beauty he no more adored,
   (Though certainly mankind he knew
   Though deep he sinks into the drift;
   Though hitherto a lady ne’er
   Though I confess I hardly dare
   Though now my love might be intense,
   Though scarcely following what was said,
   Though some men, evilly disposed,
   Though superannuated rather;
   Though to the Academy I come
   Though we will not acknowledge it.
   Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
   Though without palaces and streets,
   Though, God be praised! he ne’er designed
   Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
   Three mortal hours per diem he
   Three pairs of handsome female feet;
   Three tears they dropt with humble mein
   Thrice happy who their agonies
   Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
   Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
   Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
   Thus a guest with composure will
   Thus age approached, the common doom,
   Thus Boileau, in the guise of invective, eulogizes Louis XIV.
   Thus carelessly I once portrayed
   Thus did our friend Onéguine preach:
   Thus having braved Apollo’s rage
   Thus her perversity hath shown.
   Thus in the earth the seed expands
   Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
   Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
   Thus oft—this I myself confess—
   Thus our light race grows up and lives,
   Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
   Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
   Thus the time passes and meanwhile
   Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise(46)
   Thus to assassinate the eve?”—
   Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
   Thus we began our little tale—
   Thus, praised be God! a reputation
   Thy cheek is as a poppy red!”
   Thy meditative incantation—
   “tiaglo,” or family circle is broken up by his death.]
   Till absently Vladimir took
   Till amid trees a hovel showed,
   Till carriage lamps, a double row,
   Till January fell no snow—
   Till morn—life uniform but gay,
   Till out of breath upon a seat
   Till proper rings could be procured.
   Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
   time of it. But in this, as in other cases, “habit” alleviates
   Time was when cold seduction strove
   Time was, a valiant general might
   Time was, in style magniloquent
   Time was, the poet’s tender quill
   Time will the ravages efface—
   Time without me will lessons give,
   Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
   time: the former by Madame Cottin, the latter by the famous
   Tired by the ball’s incessant noise,
   Tiresome unto her hath become
   ’Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_”(24)
   ’Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
   ’Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
   ’Tis day, the family downstairs,
   ’Tis evidently Heaven’s will
   ’Tis finished. Horrible to read!
   ’Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
   “’Tis habit, Lenski.”—“Is your ill
   ’Tis Heaven’s will and I am thine.
   ’Tis in your power now, if desired,
   ’Tis said you are a misanthrope,
   ’Tis silent—on her shines the moon—
   ’Tis silent all! Alone the cries
   ’Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
   ’Tis something of this sort I deem.
   ’Tis time for supper, now for bed,
   ’Tis time she to the altar went!
   ’Tis time to quit this weary shore
   “’Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
   To a surrender gave consent,
   To agitate me in my dreams.
   to all appearances as if in the flesh, who induces the unfortunate
   To all good neighbours’ sport conduced.
   To anticipate the break of day,
   To array himself in evening dress.
   to assemble around a table on which is placed a dish or basin of
   To be a charming mystery:
   To cheat the inexperienced fair,
   To cool the cutlets’ seething grease,
   To cope with Ay no more I dare,
   To crush me with a just disdain.
   To dire contentment shall give birth
   To dominate her worthy lord,
   To dream upon the sunny strand
   To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
   To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
   To ease the anguish of my breast.
                          To exile _self-consigned_,
   To fawn upon and love express;
   To foreign lands he would allude,
   To freeze his finger hath begun,
   To guess how you the eve pull through.”—
   To help her to the other shore
   To his Penates now returned,
   To idle musing was a prey;
   To kiss the feet which I admired!
   To labour in his sledge forgot,
   To lay two covers secretly.
   To listen to the rippling rill.
   To listen to the words you speak,
   To loiter there in idleness
   “to lull.”]
   To male acquaintances he bows,
   To me he would his Olga give,
   To mutter her concealed desire
   To my old nurse alone peruse,
   To Olga frequently he would
   To peer into the future tries.
   to procure them, at any rate in the large towns.
   To purest love he tuned his note
   To romp and play she ne’er would go:
   To Russ indigenous are not;
   To russify the foreign phrase
   To secrets of virgins,
   To see you by our fireside stand,
   To sigh and meditate alone:
   To sketch myself that I have tried
   To slay himself with blade or ball,
   To standards in which we believe?
   To such—delightful to repel.
   To swagger as the art of love,
   To take a hand at whist oft come:
   To take this letter to O— Well!
   To the fair object of his dream,
   To the impressions of our youth,
   To the sarcastic observation,
   To the theatre he repairs
   To thy decree my will I bend.
   To vary for a few brief days.
   To wander through the meadows still,
   To whisper comfort, love and hope?
   To whom amongst the jealous throng
   To whom are our misfortunes grief
   “To whom is it to go, my sweet?
   To whom we used to consecrate
   To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
   To whom your hearts were consecrate,—
   To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
   To write in cantos twenty-five.
   To write of any other elf
   To youthful Olga’s beauty bright,
   To-day, my friends, at any rate,
   To-morrow just like yesterday.
   Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
   Together they returned, nor word
   Told me to ask you. Ere that date
   Too much I’m given to intersperse,
   Torquato Tasso’s strains I deem.
   Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
   transitory nature of merely mediocre literary reputation. One
   Transparent o’er the Neva beamed
   Transported to our Russian clime.
   treats the embryo enterprise as if already conducted to a
   Trembles upon my lips from spite,—
   Trinity Sunday was at first deemed irreligious by the Russian
   ’Twas built, the venerable pile,
   ’Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
   ’Twas not the first time, I can tell
   ’Twas plain—an oaken floor ye scan,
   ’Twas she who first within his breast
   ’Twas then he loved the tangled grove
   Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!(51)
   Twice in the year to fast were bound,
   Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
   Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
   Two minutes they in silence spent,
   Two poles together glued by ice,
   Two verses he could recollect
   Undressed herself and went to bed
   une petite vergette faite exprès, ouvrage qu’il continua fièrement
   [Unerring critics self-esteemed],
   Unknown as yet the aching heart,
   unquestionable. It undoubtedly owes its origin to Burger’s poem
   unremunerative that land has often to be forced upon the
   Unseen in thick and tangled grass
   Unseen thou wast already dear.
   Until her heart less high should bound—
   Until her powers of running fail.
   Until the sleepless Bréguet chime(7)
   Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
   Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
   Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell—
   Upon a bunch of lovage green;
   Upon her elbow she reclines,
   Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
   Upon its damp opacity,
   Upon my lake I love to float,
   Upon the ball-room’s glassy floor
   Upon the Don’s broad pastures bred
   Upon the dreary northern snows,
   Upon the earth a mist did lie
      Upon the fields of Mars a gallant warrior,
   Upon the highway of the sea
   Upon the opening page ye find:
   Upon the stage his weary glance.
   Upon the table in a trice
   Upon the windows tracery,
   Upon those pages she descries
   Upon your daughters keep an eye,
   Upward in a thin stream inclines.
   Urging your droshkies swift as air
   urn for hot water having a fire in the center. We may observe
   Us from the world wherein we live.
   utterances under its influence for what they are worth.]
   V
   V
   V
   V
   V
   Verses and tears et cetera.
   very far north, though an inhabitant of our own kitchen gardens.
   VI
   VI
   VI
   VI
   VI
   Vice had due punishment awarded,
   Vice in romance is glorified
   Viewed them with not a little scorn,
   VII
   VII
   VII
   VII
   VII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   Villages in the distance show
   Virgins miraculous I see,
   Virtue was with a bride rewarded.
   Vladimir Lenski visited
   Vladimir Lenski was his name,
   Vladimir something curtly said
   Vladimir, hourly more a slave
   Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
   Vows matrimonial to break,
   Waiting his coming—his alone!
   Walking? The landscape tires the eye
   “Warm yourself here a little space!”
   “warmer of the soul”—in French, chaufferette de l’âme. It
   Was a delightful little spot,
   Was born beside the Neva, where
   was but fifty years ago, and had he lived to a ripe old age he
   Was certainly no Grandison.
   Was certainly not erudite
   was dissolved and a heavenly one was contracted.]
   Was he in health and void of care?—
   Was it not so?—for thee I gave,
   Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
   Was it not thou, O vision bright,
   Was nothing but the British spleen
   Was ready for self-sacrifice,
   was seized on the coast of Africa when eight years of age by a
   Was that which we are wont to call
   Was worthy of that old baboon,
   Was younger than myself, my light,
   water which contains a ring. Each in her turn extracts the ring
   We all of us of education
   We are the first who such a name
   We called to mind our youthful days—
   We hear with interest intense
   We must admit but little taste
   “We never loved in days of old,
   We visit about Christmas Day,
   Weeping they loosed my tresses long(36)
   “Well!”—“I the elder should prefer,
   Well! Làrina appears to us
   Were I like you a bard by trade—
   Were stripped with melancholy sound,
   Were to analysis subjected.
   Were you in love when you were young?”—
   Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
   “What ails thee, dear?”—“I feel depressed.
   What bitter tears with thee I shed!
   What boots it with the age to strive?
   “What can be drearier than the house,
   What doth she see? Around the board
   What everybody long has known;
   What I by relatives conceive?
   What is thy cleverness to me?
   “What is your name?” The boor looked dazed,
   What jokes and guesses now abound,
   What languor would his silence show,
   What more’s required? The world replies,
   What never was remarked or heard
   What once I knew is clean forgot—
   What pleasures Hymen would prepare
   What they in conversation said?—
   What! really going? ’Tis too bad!
   What, invitations? The same day
   When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
   When but a boy he Olga loved
   When captured in a schoolboy’s cap;
   When Eugene like a ghost did rise
   When evening o’er the landscape looms,
   When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
   When harsh demeanour hath consigned
   When he in ardent verse portrays
   When in as instant she is lost,—
   When in her walks abroad she met
   When in simplicity ye wrote
   When in that company she saw
   When o’er a glass with friends we prate
   When on the pallid eastern sky
   When Passion’s fire no longer glows
   When people with long countenance
   When poets lachrymose recite
   When separation’s hour drew nigh,
   When shall I wing my passage free
   When that time comes, a poem I’ll strive
   When the obedient doll in sport
   When the same life before him lies
   When the sonorous Bréguet tells
   When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
   When will my hour of freedom come!
   When will the devil take his own!”
   When youth’s rebellious hour drew near
   When, where, and in what desert land,
   When, wise at length, we seek repose
   Whene’er a brilliant courtly dame
   Whene’er he had an aching head;
   Where—”—“What! another eclogue spin?
   Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
   Where each young critic ready stands,
   Where fashionable circles meet
   Where God alone knows whom she met.
   Where I can no more recollect?—
   Where is he who doth not deceive?
   Where is Onéguine? Half asleep,
   Where long time he in solitude
   Where many another hand had signed
   Where melancholy rocks arise
   Where plentifully feelings flow
   Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
   Wherefore? She found a secret joy
   Wherein I buried left my heart.
   Wherein I felt love’s fatal dart,
   Wherein love innocently pines.
   Wherein the child of fashion strict
   Wherein the miserable wife
   Wherein we lately left the twain.
   Which ’neath her pillow lay till morn.
   Which afterwards the muse revived.
   Which all her darling friends have scrawled
   Which falls in starry flakes below.
   Which from the devil’s bookcase start,
   Which glowed with virginal desire.
   Which might for many ages last.
   Which never have existed, e’en
   Which Ovid once immortalized,
   which Pushkin himself together with his uncle Vassili Pushkin
   Which rushed in eager dense array
   Which shines with iridescent hues.
   Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
   Which we experienced long ago.
   Which your true friend with a sweet smile
   which, at all events in its earlier developments, was of an
   Whilst all creation seemed to dream
   Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
   Whilst homeward by the nearest route
   Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
   Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
   Whilst the fond parents, friends thro’ life,
   Whilst the tired serving-men without
   Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
   Whither at headlong speed doth go
   “Whither away? Deuce take the bard!”—
   Whither shall he go first? He’ll see,
   Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
   Whither that evening he will go.
   Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
   Who cannot conjure former joys?
   Who every gesture, every phrase
   Who floats contentedly through life,
   Who following Petrarch move along
   Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
   Who in the agony of grief
   Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
   _Who in thy love finds more delight
   Who knows? with love’s consuming flame
   Who labours hard to humour us?
   Who reads his visionary theme
   Who secretly denounced the gift,
   Who selfishly unmoved remain
   Who this soft nonsense could impart,
   Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
   “Who will be there?”—“The family.
   Who without more prevarication
   Who words and actions will adjust
   Who, heard the music of my lay,
   Wholly beside herself with fear,
   Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
   Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
   Whom jealous transport cannot move,
   Whom latterly one often meets
   whom the poet in his extreme youth imagined himself in love.]
   Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
   Whom, as the custom is of men,
   Whose author nature understood
   Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
   Whose glance reflecting inspiration
   Whose hands indulgently caress
   Whose heart experience icy made
   Whose hearts responsive have remained
   Whose memory doth not refuse
   Whose qualities appeared to afford
   Whose tones Apollo’s sons inspire,
   Why did you visit our poor place?
   Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?—
   “Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
   Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
   Will he pursue?—But no one came.
   Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
   Will pass; the same to-morrow try—
   Will teach grammatical conceits,
   Will to the old times faithful be.
   Will you?”—“Agreed.”—“I thank you, friend,”
   Winter! The peasant blithely goes
   With “vale” finish off a note;
   With affectation,—nothing more.
   With all dissatisfaction shows.
   With an imagination wild,
   With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
   With boiling torrent dark and gray;
   With cherries, red currants,
   With childlike lisp will lie to please.
   With dance and with song.
   With deeper woe than others’ grief.
   With fir-trees standing motionless
   With footsteps tremulous with awe
   With gay design and silken stitch.
   With him were friends eternally:
   With his ferocious mate appears.
   With his own pawn alas! his rook!
   With hisses Cleopatra scares,
   With hope and then perplexity,
   With hopeless passion: from her bed
   With humble prose I’ll fill my page
   With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
   With inexact pronunciation
   With intellect and strong volition
   With intellect, a taste refined,
   With iridescent wing doth flap
   With its exhilarating flow,
   With jealous fire resuscitate,
   With late repentance gnaws and stings.
   With laughter smothered weariness:
   With little knowledge and that wrong
   With love which happiness extends;
   With many a snare their pathway line!
   With one foot resting on its tip
   With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
   With our Onéguine doth aspire
   With Ozeroff was wont to share
   With quite a lachrymose expression
   With rapturous longing he awaits,
   With raspberries, cherries.
   With sad refrain misfortune near.
   With satisfaction marvellous,
      With self, society, existence, discontent,
   With serious air then went away
   With shame I shudder and with dread—
   With smiling face he Lenski hears;
   With so much warmth and intellect?
   With spiritual tenderness;
   With such a perversity proclaim.
   With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
   With taffety instead of crape.
   With tears which secret sufferers love—
   With tears, confused emotions, bliss,—
   With tenderness hath recognized
   With the “Well-Wisher” in her hand!(40)
   With the epistle of my fair;
   With thee I conversed when I bore
   With this immoderate request
   With tranquil air Onéguine leads
   With unanimity complete,
   With us is easily attained.
   With what avidity and zest
   With which blind Fortune oft betrays
   With words of foreign origin
      “Within him daily see the the fires of punch and war,
   Within his memory there lay,
   Within my memory I bore
   Within resounded shriek and shout:
   Without a chance to slip away.
   Without constraint in conversation
   Without enthusiasm he met
   Without grammatical mistakes.
   Without the faintest trace to leave
   Without the ken of parents both,
   Without the least constraint he bowed.
   Would at the proper time appear.
   Would haste in agitation dire
   would have been amongst us still. He was four years younger
   Would loiter by the looking-glass,
   Would once in powdered wig appear;
   Would she in silence long remain.
   Would she the canvas tight enrich
   Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
   Would whisper: shall I so long live?”—
   Would you to me this Phyllis show,
   Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
   X
   X
   X
   X
   X
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XL
   XL
   XL
   XL
   XLI
   XLI
   XLI
   XLII
   XLII
   XLIII
   XLIII
   XLIV
   XLIX
   XLV
   XLVI
   XLVII
   XLVIII
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XXI
   XXI
   XXI
   XXI
   XXII
   XXII
   XXII
   XXII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXV
   XXV
   XXV
   XXV
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXX
   XXX
   XXX
   XXX
   XXXI
   XXXI
   XXXI
   XXXI
   XXXII
   XXXII
   XXXII
   XXXII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXV
   XXXV
   XXXV
   XXXV
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   Yawning betook him to a pen.
   Ye billows of blue Hadria’s sea,
   Ye feel but little interest,
   Ye miracles of courtly grace,
   Ye mothers also, caution use,
   Ye need dissimulation base
   Yea! although rendered beauteous
   Yes! every one must have his foes,
   Yes, happy—though she at his side
   Yet as a rule their talk I call
   Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
   Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
   Yet satiated with success,
   Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
   Yet sometimes pages two or three
   Yet still apparently aspire
   Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
   Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
   Yet was her inmost soul o’erjoyed
   Yon silly moon upon the brink
   Yonder the household lad doth run,
   You’ll find her portrait there, I vouch;
   You’ll spend your winter famously!
   You fall in love again. But still—
   “You have a letter to me sent.
   You in the least commiserate
   You know that I am now a fool—
   You never since your nose have shown.
   You never would have heard the name,
   You will not all abandon me.
   You, he a noble mind disclosed,
   Young ladies’ faces and their feet.
   Young ladies, if ye ever strove
   Young maidens, fair maidens,
   “Your fashionable world I hate,
   Your frankness I shall compensate
   Your innocent and charming note
   Your magic voices I shall greet,
   Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
   The principal outlines of these three poems are as follows: A
   at the Lyceum. We regret to add that, having accepted a
   [Note 43: Evgeny Baratynski, a contemporary of Pushkin and a
   [Note 7: M. Bréguet, a celebrated Parisian watchmaker—hence a
   [Note 5: _Les Aventures du Chevalier de Faublas_, a romance of a
   circumstances may be easily imagined which, under such a
   treats the embryo enterprise as if already conducted to a
   scholiast remarks:—“The whole of this ironical stanza is but a
   was seized on the coast of Africa when eight years of age by a
   Fair source of every fine idea,
   Salguir is a river of the Crimea.]
   Upon the highway of the sea
   Ye billows of blue Hadria’s sea,
   Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
   [Note 2: Written in Bessarabia.]
   an inducement in the southern and fertile provinces of Russia
   [Note 32: Referring to Richardson’s “Clarissa Harlowe,” “La
   But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
   “Say, of the two which was Tattiana?”
   And silent as the maid Svetlana(30)
   And I, remembering Svetlana,(54)
   Next Saturday. The Làrina
   Verses and tears et cetera.
   girls wear their hair in a single long plait or tail, “kossa;”
   loose character by Jean Baptiste Louvet de Couvray, b. 1760,
   He writes upon his parents’ tomb,
   Opened the portals of the tomb
   And oft its Dictionary thumb.(13)
   of the Latins. The word is evidently connected with the verb
   He oft upon his lips would curb,
   Thinking: ’tis foolish to disturb
   matin dans sa chambre, je le trouvais brossant ses ongles avec
   proceeds to vocal music.
   And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
   And triumphs in career erotic.
   Greek names, e.g. Agathon, Philotas, Theodora, Thekla, etc.,
   And long perukes hath vanishèd.
   What! really going? ’Tis too bad!
   Above the ashes of the dead.
   Ah! than a spectre from the dead
   Shaking with serious air the head,
   Whene’er he had an aching head;
   And soon Lel hovered o’er her head.(55)
   His shop, a night-cap on his head,
   And gently hovered o’er my head?
   And thoughtlessness to woe might lead.”
   as his predecessor in song, though he certainly did not plead
   But on the third of grove and mead
   Or a swift hare from mead to mead
   I slumber much, a little read,
   For on their brows I trembling read
   Do not excuse yourself. I read
   Some nice instructive novel read,
   ’Tis finished. Horrible to read!
   No other book had time to read.
   And pauses oft to serve out bread.
   With shame I shudder and with dread—
   Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
   Nor slander viciously could spread
   And cool sagacious mind he had:
   Attentive listened to the lad.
   But Lenski, I should be so glad
   He dragged her by a forest road
   His arm he offers. Mute and sad
   I was incensed and he was sad.
   (_Mechanically_, let us add),
   At seven in summer rose from bed,
   Undressed herself and went to bed
   With hopeless passion: from her bed
   ’Tis time for supper, now for bed,
   So she her silken sash unlaced,
   Bear gone—she at the threshold placed;
   Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
   Beneath her downy pillow placed,
   The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
   To all good neighbours’ sport conduced.
   At Làrina’s abode produced
   All overtures of friendship ended.
   Most by this circumstance offended
   The workpeople she superintended,
   The bath on Saturdays attended,
   Vice had due punishment awarded,
   Virtue was with a bride rewarded.
   Not all will like myself proceed—
   And cares not farther to proceed;
   He was a dangerous fool indeed.
   Mortally sick I am indeed.
   His uncle, busy man indeed,
   Of fleeting glory take no heed.
   But I perceive thou dost not heed—”
   He took no more the slightest heed;
   She seeks the garden in her need—
   Had run across her path at speed,
   And all with one accord agreed,
   On the dull stage find all things changed,
   But the date subsequently changed
   The wedding-day had been arranged,
   A careless looker-on estranged
   censors, and consequently expunged.
   What bitter tears with thee I shed!
   And bitter tears of fright I shed.
   Drive out the cattle from their shed,
   I mourn, but tears I cannot shed—
   Just at that time his father died,
   My mother-in-law who lately died(34)
   Vice in romance is glorified
   Customs by ages sanctified,
   But now our minds are mystified
   But in his heart dissatisfied,
   “Alack! Tattiana,” she replied,
   Lenski unto the dame replied,
   And a new diadem supplied.(28)
   The new moon’s crescent slim she spied,
   By other thoughts be occupied.
   And not a speck of dirt descried.
   by means of a “svakha,” or matchmaker. In Russia unmarried
   To sketch myself that I have tried
   I should alarm our friendship tried:
   Delusions of a mind untried,
   The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
   He round the billiard-table stalked,
   As if he cruelly had joked!
   Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
   And such unconsciously he led,
   A hermit’s life Onéguine led,
   But since to the backdoor they led
   By melancholy fogs concealed.
   More swift the room Tattiana fled,
   Nor marked how summer’s prime had fled
   Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
   Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
   And soon the friendly troop hath fled.
   But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
   The troop of apparitions fled,
   Nay! even as this instant fled,
   The pains of night have wholly fled,
   an author of promise—unfulfilled.]
   Our tender dreamer had enrolled
   By Faublas in his youth was schooled,(5)
   his literary reputation by inditing an “epic” poem entitled
   Surely ye all have overhauled
   With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
   Which all her darling friends have scrawled
   And in her conversation drawled.
   Transparent o’er the Neva beamed
   And when the watery mirror gleamed
   She never of deception dreamed
   His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
   Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?—
   A few of different temper deemed,
   Onéguine was—so many deemed
   Both natural and truthful seemed.
   Feeling in others much esteemed.
   [Unerring critics self-esteemed],
   He thought so, and existence charmed.
   And he who, jealousy disarmed,
   every male added to its number, though this could have formed
   Tattiana in despair unfeigned
   Where many another hand had signed
   And vows will probably be signed:
   Though, God be praised! he ne’er designed
   Or even, silent and resigned,
   When harsh demeanour hath consigned
   Once more to idleness consigned,
   Have e’er a precious tress consigned,
                          To exile _self-consigned_,
   A happy destiny ordained:
   Tattiana o’er the stream complained;
   Whose hearts responsive have remained
   Rooted unto the spot remained.
   O ye whom tender love hath pained
   And saying this Vladimir drained
   A something somehow have obtained,
   My sum of happiness contained;
   He sang of life’s fresh colours stained
   Before he eighteen years attained.
   With us is easily attained.
   The fruits of learning and combined
   And handsome countenance combined,
   A tender couplet he combined,
   With intellect, a taste refined,
   Love to idealize inclined;
   I’m not for witchcraft now inclined.
   And on the last one, underlined:
   Anticipating woe she pined,
   Certain misfortune near opined.
   Now a long branch itself entwined
   Constant affection intertwined
   If the fond hope I could have fanned
   Tattiana (nurse the project planned)
   There, aping Gulnare’s bard, he spanned
   Though Baratynski verses penned,(45)
   A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
   Tattiana more than ever burned
   His neighbour’s lowly tomb and mourned
   To his Penates now returned,
   The voice of jealousy is drowned.
   Our heroes at full gallop sped,
   The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
   Into the cups already sped
   Their glory with their heels of red
   Thy cheek is as a poppy red!”
   Another with cock’s head appeared,
   But Adam Smith to read appeared,
   But this a heinous crime appeared
   In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
   Upon the Don’s broad pastures bred
   Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
   And many another slily sneered;
   In her affairs ne’er interfered,
   may thus be discovered.]
   Extinct the flame which once had fired;
   By indolence and languor fired
   Singing God knows what maid admired,
   To kiss the feet which I admired!
   In amorous flights when so inspired,
   ’Tis in your power now, if desired,
   How like the billow I desired
   The fated nutriment desired;
   And both of dull existence tired,
   I write to you! Is more required?
   I long by ballets have been bored,
   Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
   Though beauty he no more adored,
   And harmony was soon restored.
   Deeming himself a veteran scarred
   Tattiana through the forest erred,
   Of the romances she preferred,
   And what she from the cards inferred.
   The Medal Otchakoff conferred!(29)
   Of Olga he in song averred;
   And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
   Onéguine’s speeches I abhorred
   Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
   He who economy abhorred,
   Of censure for the same incurred;
   Till proper rings could be procured.
   Now Didelot scarce can be endured!”
   At first, but soon became inured
   On melted wax in water poured;
   Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
   In fact, some people were assured
   Rebuffed—as quickly reassured,
   Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
   The contact of the foot I raised
   You, he a noble mind disclosed,
   Though some men, evilly disposed,
   In love adventures she was versed,
   Alas! for now before her passed
   When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
   The style in which my hero dressed;
   And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
   “What ails thee, dear?”—“I feel depressed.
   But sits in bed with air depressed,
   Are not with elegance impressed.
   The image of her seal impressed.
   And thoughts of Olga first impressed
   Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
   Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
   So she in French herself expressed.
   But tremor still her frame possessed,
   Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
   Ambassador bought and presented him to Peter the Great who caused
   That rascal Lovelace she abused;
   By friendship how they were abused,
   Not that she had his works perused,
   Even so! His passions soon abated,
   They sang, whilst negligently seated,
   By daily life deteriorated,
   Nor long his mind was agitated
   Awhile this beauty captivated,
   was dissolved and a heavenly one was contracted.]
   Were to analysis subjected.
   And life and fate in turn selected
   Tattiana with impatience waited
   Vladimir Lenski visited
   the married women, on the other hand, in two, which are twisted
   By Olga’s hand distributed
   And every year distributed
   All mothers their sweet girls believed
   Lenski as a good match received,—
   Retained the image, though short-lived,
   The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
   A new proprietor arrived,
   Which afterwards the muse revived.
   When but a boy he Olga loved
   He witnessed tenderly and moved
   Strictly the Carnival observed,
   For first “madame” his wants observed,
   They in a peaceful life preserved
   But Eugene was by fate preserved,
   But proudly in his song preserved
   The gifted songster never swerved,
   Journeys and warriors to wed.
   And when her violence reviewed—
   Without the least constraint he bowed.
   A scant attendance Lenski showed
   Till amid trees a hovel showed,
   But from the interview what flowed?
   The insensate fire of love still glowed
   And privileges nice allowed,
   He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
   In correspondence been allowed.(39)
   He with his little maiden played,
   At prisoner’s base she never played.
   The deuce with my inside has played.”
   The drama of my youth was played.(10)
   Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
   In Olga’s face no life’s displayed.
   Attend in male attire arrayed.
   And when for Olga nurse arrayed
   Thus carelessly I once portrayed
   There long time sad at heart he stayed:
   Their giddy sports she ne’er enjoyed.
   Yet was her inmost soul o’erjoyed
   Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
   Of course Tattiana was annoyed
   “What is your name?” The boor looked dazed,
   Again imagination blazed,
   And “Agathon” replied, amazed.(53)
   Which Ovid once immortalized,
   Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
   With tenderness hath recognized
   For which the poet agonized
   Tattiana doth accept his aid;
   And her upon the threshold laid.
   He found him on the table laid,
   And, hanging down her head, the maid
   And crossed with trembling hand the maid.
   Beneath her parents’ eyes the maid
   Singing inside her hut the maid
   In Olga’s album, youthful maid,
   Remained with him the youthful maid.
   Alone with my Venetian maid,
   Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
   For shame lift up the modest maid.
   Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
   A due which must to earth be paid.
   Nor frigid adulation paid.
   No time to pick it up! afraid,
   That bilberry wine, I’m sore afraid,
   She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
   Onéguine then approached and said:
   “Poor Yorick,” mournfully he said,
   What they in conversation said?—
   And the old nurse a brief prayer said
   Though scarcely following what was said,
   In whispers low the neighbours said:
   Vladimir something curtly said
   Better than Chateaubriand did
   [Note 4: Referring to Tomi, the reputed place of exile of Ovid.
   guilty to the fact, since he remarks in his ode to Ovid:
   She dreamt she journeyed o’er a field
   An ardent heart and yet so mild?—
   With an imagination wild,
   And Limburg cheese alive and old
   He took the room wherein the old
   But that Princess Pauline of old,
   I also wandered there of old,
   “We never loved in days of old,
   These evenings as in days of old
   And the suspicious veteran old,
   Tattiana in traditions old
   An almanac but eight years old.
   Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
   The wolf upon the highways bold
   The morn arises foggy, cold,
   He laughs, although it aches from cold,
   But cannot stand the northern cold.(2)
   His mother from the door doth scold.
   His housekeeper was wont to scold,
   How empires store of wealth unfold,
   Afar, where clothed in green and gold
   The medium is required of gold.
   Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
   Before it ran a stream. Behold!
   In one he doth accounts behold,
   Had killed me had the like been told.”
   Her Moscow cousin, often told
   And the young ladies fortunes told,
   In dreams and what the moon foretold
   To Olga frequently he would
   Of friends unceremonious would
   admiration. He was an officer in the Hussars of the Guard, and
   of the approaching conquest of Britain by Napoleon, and
   skill or accomplishments, or who had amassed wealth; and
   The passage containing the reference to the three tears and
   his youth appears to have entertained great respect and
   Exist—that their immortal band
   [Note 53: The superstition is that the name of the future husband
   No one appeared to lend a hand.
   With the “Well-Wisher” in her hand!(40)
   Her foot was in my other hand.
   Some wretched journal in his hand;
   A weary season was at hand—
   Of Africa, ancestral land,(21)
   When, where, and in what desert land,
   Friends of the sons of every land,
   in Finland.]
   And in the bathroom did command
   In times gone by thy bare command—”
   Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
   To dream upon the sunny strand
   November at the gate did stand.
   To see you by our fireside stand,
   Immersed in secret thought I stand
   “Oh! nurse, nurse, you don’t understand!
   And had with waddling in the end
   Charms more enduring in the end.
   To thy decree my will I bend.
   The thunderbolt on you descend!
   Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
   Will you?”—“Agreed.”—“I thank you, friend,”
   But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
   Are admirable, my dear friend,
   An ear to my confession lend;
   Her caps and night-dresses to mend.
   Assistance ever will extend,
   But finally in wedlock bind.
   The young proprietor we find;
   Upon the opening page ye find:
   Scarcely in Russia can ye find
   But what astonished do I find
   Fresh cause of quarrel then I’ll find,
   Infallibly you there will find
   The wood she enters—bear behind,—
   Of dreary Russia left behind,
   To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
   A fiery and eccentric mind,
   From mere vacuity of mind
   Become alarmed. So never mind!
   One image occupied his mind,
   It gradually possessed his mind;
   English dramatists had also their share in influencing his mind,
      I visit in these days, with melancholy mind,
   A pair; though desolate my mind,
   And the recesses of my mind
   So uncongenial to my mind,
      CANTO THE SECOND
   Canto The Second
   End of Canto the Second.
   Of whirligigs were very fond,
   Until her heart less high should bound—
   By barren snow heaped up and bound,
   Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
   Twice in the year to fast were bound,
   She wore her corset tightly bound,
   And stoves of various shapes abound.
   Funeral amateurs abound!
   However cherries might abound,
   What jokes and guesses now abound,
   A stream, by winter’s ice unbound,
   A beau is for Tattiana found!
   (This by command; for it was found,
   Endless conjectures all propound
   And secretly their views expound.
   Of horn in circle call them round.
   Recovering, Tania gazes round;
   Imperial portraits hang around
   And from the country all around
   The German baker looks around
   A tangled wilderness around.
   Amid the snowdrifts which surround
   And by the fiddle’s rushing sound
   Attentive to the echoing sound,
   Nor at the hour of noon with sound
   The Russian N with nasal sound
   Morning awakes with joyous sound;
   Were stripped with melancholy sound,
   Inside clink glasses, cries resound
   Debate commanded ample food—
   The fruits of science, evil, good,
   successful conclusion and become matter of history. A good
   Such is the country custom good;
   Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
   Assemble from the neighbourhood:
   Absorbed in melancholy mood
   Onéguine meditative stood,
   Lessons to give he understood!
   Whose author nature understood
   A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
   “Whither away? Deuce take the bard!”—
   Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
   In love’s campaigns Onéguine heard
   What never was remarked or heard
   A noted fop who gambled hard.
   “I won’t detain you; but ’tis hard
   A young and handsome galliard.
   What doth she see? Around the board
   Her Grandison was in the Guard,
   He hies unto the “Boulevard,”
   Believed, the people’s wisdom weird,
      CANTO THE THIRD
   Canto The Third
   End of Canto the Third
   Whose qualities appeared to afford
   She deemed its outline might afford.
   Lo! my Onéguine rural lord!
   Sighs on another than her lord
   of 1861 by the serfs to their lord.
   To dominate her worthy lord,
   Command him not to say a word—
   “leleyat” to fondle or soothe, likewise with our own word
   Together they returned, nor word
   Each gust of temper, silly word,
   Seems so unnatural and absurd:
   Of late I have been quite absurd,—
   No more the music thunders loud,
   And never hath our language proud
   Even as Moscow, city proud.
   He enters: in the hall a crowd,
   The mystic monogram, O. E.
   But what a nuisance it will be,
   Will to the old times faithful be.
   Callous to all he seemed to be.
   Feelings which long had ceased to be
   I would desire my bride to be—
   Is still condemned in love to be;
   Sombre or glad in turn to be,
   As lordly mansions ought to be,
   As many entertainments be!
   “Do not—you might—suspicious be;
   source of inspiration. Even the poem in question cannot be
   Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
   Or a swift meteor, may be,
   (One and the same thing it may be)
   Inseparable soon they be.
   Ne’er trusted to the treacherous ace.
   And physic bring with mournful face,
   I never should have seen your face
   Pallid and melancholy face,
   “She who with melancholy face
   Time will the ravages efface—
   Bright blazed the window of the place,
   Her in the pitfalls which we place.
   And then “monsieur” supplied her place;(3)
   Hard by the window took her place.”—
   Why did you visit our poor place?
   And after them at headlong pace
   Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
   Accelerates her hasty pace,
   “Warm yourself here a little space!”
   Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
   And who the rent-roll of his race
   Inheritor of all his race.
   The boy was wild but full of grace.
   An ancient lady full of grace.—
   The easier ’tis to gain her grace,
   He called to mind Tattiana’s grace,
   A print without the picture’s grace,
   Ye miracles of courtly grace,
   “O Rus!”—Horace
   And my Eugene the path must trace—
   Of the commencement of the piece.
   A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
   The shining river clothed in ice;
   Two poles together glued by ice,
   Stately, devoid of prejudice,
   Was ready for self-sacrifice,
   But wherefore not?—’Tis pleasant, nice,
   Behold! than polished floor more nice
   Like his, her dress was always nice,
   Euphonious, though I know a spice
   And shall adopt some new caprice.
   Upon the table in a trice
   The excited hero in a trice
   Then they’re so innocent of vice,
   But contrary to her advice
   of general in the Russian service.]
   Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
   “Song and dance,” the well-known “khorovod,” in which the dance
   Again in her ethereal dance?
   Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
   Free scope he yields unto his glance,
   Or will my melancholy glance
   Upon the stage his weary glance.
   The days of love and of romance!
   Canto the First of this romance.
   Reviews both dress and countenance,
   When people with long countenance
   He yawns, averts his countenance,
   repugnance.]
   I heard thy voice’s resonance
   Then would we muse as in a trance,
   The hero’s name too in advance,
   Such open-hearted innocence.
   maiden loses her lover in the wars; she murmurs at Providence
   [Note 6: A la “Bolivar,” from the founder of Bolivian independence.]
   He wanders in his indolence;
   And natural benevolence,
   But lo! the friends to chat commence.
   Habit would bring indifference.
   I yield with a low reverence;
   I cannot tell on what pretence—
   But this adventure’s consequence
   I, after so much eloquence,
   And yet oblivion forbade.
   The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
   My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
   As in a thicket’s humble shade,
   Hid in the gondola’s dark shade,
   Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
   Beneath the sheltering oak tree’s shade
   There, there, beneath the side-scene’s shade
   He whom we sing to shall be made
   I was for calm existence made,
   Straight for the entrance then he made
   For our amusement ever made
   Nor further comment that night made.
   Whose heart experience icy made
   They shovel silver with a spade,
   The goddess would a masquerade
   Choosing a profitable trade,
   Were I like you a bard by trade—
   But cannot anyhow evade
   Doubt and uncertainty decide:
   “He promised here this day to ride,”
   On horseback every day they ride—
   Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
   Suddenly to the left hand side,
   And hastened to his uncle’s side,
   Yes, happy—though she at his side
   But grown familiar side by side
   Found them in darkness side by side,
   If thou wert sitting by my side,
   And soon Onéguine’s door beside
   Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
   Always together, eventide
   And death before the husband wide
   Onéguine oped the cupboards wide.
   To foreign lands he would allude,
   Beneath the flag of Quietude,
   Then, then—well, in some solitude
   Where long time he in solitude
   Since Eugene in that solitude
   From henceforth I confide to thee!
   Hath fate apportioned unto thee
   Then, I say truly, none but thee
   In snow she sinks up to the knee;
   By Providence’s dark decree!
   This lot in life with stern decree?
   When shall I wing my passage free
   Impressed him in the least degree,—
   Perchance he will to all the three.
   Yet sometimes pages two or three
   His valet brings him letters three.
   Knew not an iamb from a choree,
   Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
   And a guitar produced we see,
   Virgins miraculous I see,
   Whither shall he go first? He’ll see,
   The giddy world at last shall see.
   The break of day she doth not see,
   The letter is the thing, you see,—
   Whilst the fond parents, friends thro’ life,
   Such was Onéguine’s sainted life,
   and secondly to “Eda,” by Baratynski, a poem descriptive of life
   He in the early years of life
   Who floats contentedly through life,
   Rural Life
   And like his shadow dogged his life,
   Should be respected throughout life
   And leads a solitary life?
   Of error and the passions’ strife.
   In aimless ease and far from strife,
   By every proper-minded wife,
   Dreamed in the future man and wife.
   Wherein the miserable wife
   Or better,—like a faithful wife.
   By children and by faithful wife
   Proud of his dinners and his wife!
   signifies a nimbus or glory, and is the symbol of marriage
   meaning of the passage is therefore: his earthly marriage
   pension from Napoleon, Parny forthwith proceeded to damage
   With humble prose I’ll fill my page
   Thus having braved Apollo’s rage
   For two whole days it seemed a change
   The cool dark oaken grove to range,
   was but fifty years ago, and had he lived to a ripe old age he
   For empty sound the rascal swore he
   A paragon of virtue he!
   Three mortal hours per diem he
   And by a sweet delusion he
   Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
   She oped her eyes and cried: ’tis he!
   And cried within myself: ’tis he!
   Dressed like a London dandy he
   And in her native language she
   Nor on the letter yet hath she
   And disappear in space; then she
   ring. The first-named lines foreshadow death; the latter, the
   Caucasus_, the latter, _The Fountain of Baktchiserai_. The
   in the fields with their infant husbands in their arms. The
   chiefly known for his erotic poetry which attracted the
   is therein praised as the best of companions “beside the
   center. The tea-pot is usually placed on the top of the
   supposed to indicate the fortunes of the immediate holder of the
   the poet. The former line indicates the _Prisoner of the
   [Note 14: _Elvine_, or _Elvina_, was not improbably the owner of the
   _Ozeroff_, one of the best-known Russian dramatists of the
   often without going through the form of acknowledging the
   catastrophe turns out a dream brought on by “sorcery,” during the
   Thirty thousand Turks are said to have perished during the
   [Note 13: Refers to Dictionary of the Academy, compiled during the
   consigned to oblivion, will impress the reader with the
   reside in the house of the bridegroom’s father till the
   dramatist. His first comedy “The Brigadier,” procured him the
   account of the bard and his creations will be found in the
   [Note 36: Courtships were not unfrequently carried on in the
   [Note 29: The fortress of Otchakoff was taken by storm on the
   [Note 20: The strong influence exercised by Byron’s genius on the
   unremunerative that land has often to be forced upon the
   favour of the second Catherine. His best, however, is the
   Petersburg on the right bank of the Neva chiefly inhabited by the
   Men love no more, as only the
   No fond illusions live to soothe,
   A dying man with art to soothe,
   And silently I here must die—
   Upon the earth a mist did lie
   Dark, unavailing reverie,
   Aroused in him sweet reverie.
   The bridge and alley to the lake,
   I the same admonition make.
   He deemed his friends but longed to make
   Acquaintance instantly to make.
   E’en as the presence of a snake,
   Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
   Great sacrifices for his sake!
   For law I _far niente_ take
   And every morning I awake
   Pedantic although scholar like,
   Of the horizon she is like!”—
   “The post hath kept him, it is like.”
   Then suddenly discharge a joke
   And barely visible the smoke
   How artless was the note which spoke
   And Lenski followed—a light broke—
   The ladies’ laughter to provoke.
   [Note 37: It is thus that I am compelled to render a female
   But now in her effulgence pale
   She trembled and grew deadly pale.
   Thus we began our little tale—
   Then it may be, O flattering tale,
   I know there’s none more amiable.
   Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
   Permit me; is it worth the trouble
   or runners, is a vehicle with a hood not unlike a big cradle.]
   Singing in chorus all the while.
   Regained authority awhile,
   Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
   Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
   Thus the time passes and meanwhile
   Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
   As rosy lips without a smile,
   They crack a feeble joke and smile—
   That afterwards with evil smile
   Which your true friend with a sweet smile
   ’Twas built, the venerable pile,
   Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
   They disappeared by stealth and guile,
   But he desired not to beguile
   Shall my declining years beguile;
   The Russian language I deem vile
   agreeable than its prototype “Leonora,” inasmuch as the whole
   About the rain and flax and cattle.”—
   Preserves and an eternal prattle
   I owe the censorship a little.
   But will not modify a tittle—
   bottle.”]
   A novel in Lafontaine’s style,
   In solid, unpretentious style,
   And a romance in ancient style
   His character attracted me.
   And, inspiration firing me,
   Despair and anger seize on me,
   You will not all abandon me.
   But I—what is all this to me?
   What is thy cleverness to me?
   But Lord! from friends deliver me!
   “Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!”—
   Open the window—sit by me.”
   From Gottingen inspired he came,
   And straight returning whence he came,
   Will he pursue?—But no one came.
   But when the winter season came
   Tattiana waits. No answer came!
   Her shoulder—Olga swiftly came—
   Hateful the hollow world became,
   Tattiana faltered, and became
   Nor by her beauty she became
   Because a member I became.
   Whene’er a brilliant courtly dame
   styled “monsieur” or “madame.”]
   In hopes of everlasting fame
   And at the altar of their fame
   Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
   Strange unto her each childish game,
   He takes his seat, concludes his game,
   Believe me, of my present shame
   That vicious set whom I don’t blame—
   He kindled his poetic flame.
   Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
   By love’s inevitable flame.
   And gazed around with eyes of flame;
   Who knows? with love’s consuming flame
   And in addition youth is flame
   We are the first who such a name
   You never would have heard the name,
   And so Tattiana was her name,
   Vladimir Lenski was his name,
   A finished madrigal would frame
   She waits, on fire her trembling frame—
   Another passed; ’twas just the same.
   Of many an economic scheme;
   The olden time shall be my theme.
   And then the stanzas of my theme
   Who reads his visionary theme
   Of touching lightly every theme.
   He with an innocence extreme
   Descends the bank with care extreme,
   Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
   “My uncle’s goodness is extreme,
   Until the sleepless Bréguet chime(7)
   Transported to our Russian clime.
   And visit many a foreign clime,
   On sunny days the glistening rime,
   His footing on the treacherous rime
   for the dates of their births and deaths. Yet the poet’s prime
   Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
   Sledging, the snows, which at the time
   fashionable society. It should be borne in mind that at the time
   For a protracted space of time.
   And thus he spent eight years of time,
   Her figure perfect grows with time!
   It now to investigate is time,
   How in the country pass this time?
   And may fall headlong any time.
   Announcing to him dinner-time.
   She is an angel! We sometime
   Across her youth a shade had come,
   I am in love, my hour hath come!
   Though to the Academy I come
   When will my hour of freedom come!
   To take a hand at whist oft come:
   Tiresome unto her hath become
   And shorter had the days become.
   His name: the tenderness of home
   As in her heart the thought sank home,
   Homeward returning, he at home
   Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
   contemporaries. The editor once excused himself for some
   An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
   Oft staring through the window pane
   A shape half cat and half a crane.
   But shall depict the touching scene
   Of the domains of the side-scene.
   The village wherein yawned Eugene
   Such were the musings of Eugene.
   Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
   All this was novel to Eugene.
   A true Childe Harold my Eugene
   Between myself and my Eugene,
   As a poetic life serene,
   And irrigate them with champagne;
   Are turned upon her. All combine
   He smiles, in laughter all combine;
   A single being: ’twas in fine
   The sneers of critics superfine;
   Nouvelle Heloise,” and Madame de Stael’s “Delphine.”]
   Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,—(32)
   The lamps illuminating shine;
   Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?”—
   ’Tis Heaven’s will and I am thine.
   The kennel or a kindred line,
   Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
   mutilated Dante’s famous line.]
   With many a snare their pathway line!
   Akulka who was once Celine,
   Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
   Corset and album and Pauline,
   Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
   A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
   No other than Onéguine mine.
   In one great shout: she’s mine! she’s mine!
   Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
   Of my impassioned heroine.
   Dreaming herself the heroine
   the stage in early life and married a Prince Gagarine.
   A tombstone, Aphrodite’s shrine,
   The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
   Tattiana’s Letter to Onéguine
   Another bard with art divine
   I love them, O my dear Elvine,(14)
   About the crop of hay, the wine,
   Give me just half a glass of wine—
   transitory nature of merely mediocre literary reputation. One
   The sum of my existence gone
   Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
   That hero, though his merit shone,
   On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
   Forgotten in the village lone,
   “Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
   Having for money’s sake alone
   To sigh and meditate alone:
   Can hearty welcome give alone.
   In horror for itself alone,
   Good-night.” Behold! she is alone!
   Waiting his coming—his alone!
   Moina recalls for this alone
   And in the frosty night alone
   “Mine!” cried Eugene with savage tone.
   That all may hear his voice’s tone.
   That like a friendly voice its tone
   She murmurs in an undertone
   Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
   No answer all that day was borne.
   peasants, in order that the taxes, for which the whole Commune
   A constant harping on one tune,
   The nightingale trills forth her tune;
   [Note: Mikhailovskoe, 1825-6]
   [Note: Odessa and Mikhailovskoe, 1824.]
   [Mikhailovskoe, 1825]
   The aged woman in her woe:
   Or quietly partake our woe.
   E’en hopeless egoism’s dark shape.
   With taffety instead of crape.
   Could in romantic mantle drape
   His book-shelf instantly doth drape
   To whisper comfort, love and hope?
   In country solitude you mope,
   ’Tis said you are a misanthrope,
   garment not known, so far as I am aware, to Western Europe.
   On horseback gallop o’er the steppe!
   in Athens,” “Fingal,” “Demetrius Donskoi,” and “Polyxena,” are
   Here I remark all poets are
   I ask, all ye who poets are,
   His inner consciousness laid bare,
   Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
   Was he in health and void of care?—
   Tattiana’s beauty, pale with care,
   Albums magnificent which scare
   Lenski at intervals would dare,
   To cope with Ay no more I dare,
   Though I confess I hardly dare
   Or vainly ’mid luxurious fare
   With Ozeroff was wont to share
   And impiously should declare,
   I cannot help it I declare,
   The riot of the world and glare
   And the more surely we ensnare
   What pleasures Hymen would prepare
   But, O ye tomes without compare,
   assault and ensuing massacre.]
   Tattiana’s love was quite sincere,
   Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
   “Abandon hope for ever here!”(38)
      “He’s here! Eugene is here!
   (I speak not of our poems here),
   I promised!—Did I so?—Well, there!
   And Eugene soon discovered there
   The young Simeonova too there
   It may be ye were born, or there
   Was born beside the Neva, where
   He bends his course to Talon’s, where(8)
   I yield the fruit of work severe.
   “Die now, Denis!” In fact, his subsequent performances were
   And dark and drear the evenings were,
   As if impossible it were
   Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
   pamphleteer of the French Revolution: was at first an emigre,
   Would haste in agitation dire
   Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
   Authors replete with sacred fire
   Or bosom full of languid fire,—
   The proud ones are not worth the fire
   Their privileged allurements fire
   With our Onéguine doth aspire
   Yet still apparently aspire
   And that no longer could inspire.
   Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
   Whose tones Apollo’s sons inspire,
   To mutter her concealed desire
   A hidden train of wild desire.
   All that perfection could desire;
   He felt the laudable desire
   This world. I do not praise desire,
   So ardently did I desire
   Which glowed with virginal desire.
   But Lenski, having no desire
   Slowly exhausted by desire,
   His constant soul could ever tire,
   The wit of others to acquire.
   Opened with care, and entering bore
   With thee I conversed when I bore
   Within my memory I bore
   Tattiana, Russian to the core,
   Or, as it were, the Freischutz’ score
   The Russian winter did adore
   Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
   And the young girl appeared before
   My spirit with such pangs before.
   Thou’lt suffer, dearest, but before,
   They stir the heart as heretofore.
   To help her to the other shore
   The captives of the Salguir’s shore.(22)
   Or by the ocean’s rocky shore.
   ’Tis time to quit this weary shore
   And thy protection I implore.
   With affectation,—nothing more.
   errand. It is a repulsive subject. “Svetlana,” however, is more
   As if against obstruction sore
   A gust of passion never tore
   Away her golden earrings tore;
   Endowing us from out her store
   Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
   “But which, my dear?—In days of yore
   d. 1797, famous for his bold oration denouncing Robespierre,
   ‘Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse’—Malfilatre
   A fragile bridge and insecure,
   For who imposture can endure,
   But competition I abjure
   But deeming all this nonsense pure,
   He will delight you, I am sure,
   In history he took no pleasure,
   Found out the secret how at pleasure
   tastes, see his poem of “Angelo,” founded upon “Measure for Measure.”]
   Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
   And then she soon ’twixt work and leisure
   Serious endeavours to assure
   And after Albion’s proud lyre (20)
   For ever with thy tattling lyre,
   Ye need dissimulation base
   Felled a calumniator base!
   That a friend’s arm in every case
   Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
   With childlike lisp will lie to please.
   To cool the cutlets’ seething grease,
   If seriously he hath disease;
   In motley and amusing chase.
   Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
   Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
   I say without poetic phrase,
   Address to you one single phrase
   To russify the foreign phrase
   Who every gesture, every phrase
   Eugene would speak regarding these.
   by various expedients, is the favourite pastime on these
   It matters not. Hope e’en to these
   She would pronounce _à la Française_;
   Of passion they so often raise.
   The curtain now they slowly raise.
   Away! and cease to ring their praise
   As cyphers others to appraise,
   Because he could not gourmandise
   They growl a bit—they scandalise—
   Crushing and a confusing noise;
   Tired by the ball’s incessant noise,
   Engrave the ice with strident noise.
   When Eugene like a ghost did rise
   In column blue the smoke doth rise;
   Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
   Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
   Late in the afternoon to rise,
   The shopman and the pedlar rise
   Where melancholy rocks arise
   Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
   Of the night sentinels arise
   And would by candlelight arise.
   Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise(46)
   Olga the tea must supervise—
   He is a charming youth and wise.
   Man—forty years long in this wise—
   But now a question in this wise
   May be the empire of the sense,
   And I admired their common sense
   Reduced with effort unto sense,
   Though now my love might be intense,
   We hear with interest intense
   Phials of crystal scents enclose.
   A curious interest disclose
   “Command me, darling, what you choose”—
   gross error by pleading that he had been “on the loose.”]
   Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
   When, wise at length, we seek repose
   And where at last his bones repose
   But better loved the soft repose
   Her smile and maidenly repose,
   Already crisp hoar frosts impose
   Furious he from the table rose;
   (Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
   He enters. High the cork arose
   And the conviction soon arose,
   Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
   Too much I’m given to intersperse,
   They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
   And also that my feeble verse—
   Although we read him heaps of verse.
   Or ice and flame, are not diverse
   The speech of man and tramp of horse.
   Detecting him the passing horse
   Most usually a Cossack horse
   A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
   In age the memory gets worse,
   Existence would not make a curse,
   “How dull you are this morning, nurse!”
   All visited him at first, of course;
   A dinner, whimsical each course,
   Snorts, and his rider bends his course
   Ye mothers also, caution use,
   One instrument for his own use—
   I once forgot for your sweet cause
   I lift a warning voice because
   The thirst for fame and man’s applause,
   Now I am ready to refuse.
   Whose memory doth not refuse
   But look you—ah! do not refuse.”
   With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
   Poetic transport did infuse,
   The monsters of the British Muse
   Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
   A mournful temper on his Muse.
   But I the products of my Muse,
   But I must now employ my Muse
   Incited by his stormy Muse
   Then became busy with the house,
   “What can be drearier than the house,
   Besides the hobbies of a spouse
   Night separated from her spouse,
   So hearken, every worthy spouse,
   Deplores a most unworthy spouse
   I would your vigilance arouse,
   The drum already doth arouse.
   To my old nurse alone peruse,
   But Olga would not such peruse.
   Confess, O ye who this peruse,
   The Fête
   “Me?”—“Yes! It is Tattiana’s fête
   They long ago had held debate.
   They would not solemnly debate
   My famous portrait indicate
   But this amusement delicate
   The Lovelaces are out of date,
   All this I know is out of date,
   Told me to ask you. Ere that date
   He was most gay. The happy date
   That is, he could elucidate
   The story of thy life and fate.
   On Lenski’s matrimonial fate
   Another time, so willed it Fate,
   Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
   The peasant blessed his happy fate.
   He nears a spacious mansion’s gate,
   The servants used to congregate
   Tend not my heart to mitigate,
   The hostess doth interrogate:
   Both were expectant of the hate
   “Your fashionable world I hate,
   Both were of passion satiate
   Excruciate the heart and late
   “He hath neglected us of late.”—
   That year the autumn season late
   Shall surely, be it soon or late,
   A promenade in twilight late
   (Like other things I could relate)
   Sometime collected, shall relate
   But if the truth I must relate,
   “But tell me, nurse, can you relate
   Desirous to annihilate
   In charming fashion mutilate?
   How soon he learnt to titillate
   But now my mind is desolate,
   A mild quotation to translate,
   And you, O maids immaculate,
   But I came not to adulate:
   Just at the hour we designate
   And, joy of souls effeminate,
   By many a lamp illuminate,
   I had found my predestinate,
   Perchance one more affectionate.
   And grasp a stirrup fortunate—
   to all appearances as if in the flesh, who induces the unfortunate
   But if my lot unfortunate
   By time (who can anticipate?)
   If but to lighten Time’s dull rate,
   By an _obrok’s_ indulgent rate:(23)
   To-day, my friends, at any rate,
   The Làrinas would celebrate,
   To whom your hearts were consecrate,—
   To whom we used to consecrate
   That chosen heroes consecrate,
   But merely to exasperate;
   You in the least commiserate
   When o’er a glass with friends we prate
   If cleverly or not I prate.
   Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
   Your frankness I shall compensate
   With jealous fire resuscitate,
   Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
   Perchance some heart ’twill agitate,
   The matter did not agitate,
   The secrets of the marriage state
   By rank as settled by the State.(27)
   The sorrows of a single state.
   I am not strong enough to state;
   My heart of old would captivate.
   My soul I cannot renovate—
   With unanimity complete,
   Around my stanzas incomplete
   The fervid poet would recite,
   When poets lachrymose recite
   Was certainly not erudite
   Grew like a lily pure and white,
   A bottle of a vintage white
   Beneath the table-cloth of white,
   Its ebullition foaming white
   All so distinct, and all so white!
   Happy who thereto can unite
   The girl in marriage they unite.
   Trembles upon my lips from spite,—
   I have endured without respite.
   And madrigals I’m asked to write!
   Beyond this may attempt to write_.
   Serve who could neither read nor write.
   I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
   A Russian household simple quite,
   Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
   For I myself was thirteen quite;(35)
   And town and friends forgotten quite.
   Fond declarations they invite
   On innocent delights I dote,
   On balls I madly used to dote,
   With “vale” finish off a note;
   Or the delivery of a note.
   Baratynski, see Note 43.]
   superstitious practice, which is not confined to Russia. See Note 52.
   [Note 54: See Note 30.]
   She heard of servant-maids the note,
   Your innocent and charming note
   To purest love he tuned his note
   [Note 19:
   The letter which Tattiana wrote.
   seductive feet apostrophized by the poet, since, in 1816, he wrote
   When in simplicity ye wrote
   And an elegiac poem wrote.
   But Lenski madrigals ne’er wrote
   So let us to the ball-room haste,
   We must admit but little taste
   All which in Paris eager taste,
   More satisfaction to her taste.
   And she despite herself would waste
   And ease and fashionable waste,—
   And education runs to waste,
   This anchorite amid his waste
   Subscribed, _toujours à vous, Annette;_
   Device of rural minds acute!)
   From whose analysis minute
   Whilst homeward by the nearest route
   My country’s honour and repute
   Her all in all did constitute;
   A wild enthusiastic tongue,
   From her my lips shall learn the tongue
   Did they not all the Russian tongue
   Onéguine knew enough, the rogue
   Latin is just now not in vogue,
   Her locks were of a golden hue,
   Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
   He racked his brains to find its clue
   His vanity first let us pique
   Without the faintest trace to leave
   And all without her husband’s leave.
   My mournful fate in verse to weave,
   Into delicious bondage gave
   Antiquity no pleasure gave,
   But promise of our meeting gave,
   Was it not so?—for thee I gave,
   The prejudices all men have,
   [Note: The serfs destined for military service used to have
   As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
   Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
   Vladimir, hourly more a slave
   He sang of love—to love a slave.
   The moderns of the ancients rave—
   The fatal secrets of the grave,
   My guardian angel to the grave.
   The Lord deliver her and save!
   And thy inebriating wave
   Thus to assassinate the eve?”—
   Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,(44)
   These are your relatives, believe:
   To standards in which we believe?
   When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
   Where is he who doth not deceive?
   What I by relatives conceive?
   “Not at all.”—“That I can’t conceive!
   In clouds of steam above perceive.
   To write in cantos twenty-five.
   To me he would his Olga give,
   Time without me will lessons give,
   Us from the world wherein we live.
   Would whisper: shall I so long live?”—
   So meantime let him joyous live
   But I await thee: scarce alive
   The most industrious man alive
   And our successors soon shall drive
   And yet he in your cause would strive
   When that time comes, a poem I’ll strive
   What boots it with the age to strive?
   fermented rye used by the peasantry, and the more expensive
   And loves you as—a relative!
   Applause, the people’s donative.
   “Goddam! Goddam! par un French—Dog.” It is descriptive
   There our Katènine did revive
   My heart with but one look revive;
   That guests approach: and when above
   The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
   None, be my witness Heaven above!
   By the decree of Mighty Jove,
   Farewell! thou golden days of love!
   The all-entrancing joys of love—
   To swagger as the art of love,
   And what resulted? Drunk with love,
   whom the poet in his extreme youth imagined himself in love.]
   I love you with a brother’s love,
   Extended—haunt which Dryads love.
   By absence who hath chilled his love,
   With tears which secret sufferers love—
   The malady of hopeless love
   “Ideas and time ne’er backward move;
   Whom jealous transport cannot move,
   And in the Summer Garden rove.
   At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
   Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
   ’Twas then he loved the tangled grove
   A thick immense neglected grove
   Around the meadow and the grove.
   Gently for pranks he would reprove
   If Olga smilingly approve,
   Time was when cold seduction strove
   Young ladies, if ye ever strove
   commences thus: “The cat asked the kitten to sleep on the stove.”]
   Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
   urn for hot water having a fire in the center. We may observe
   Desire to rule ye may observe
   Polite demeanour to preserve,
   Him who inspired both love and awe,
   With footsteps tremulous with awe
   Striking the intellect with awe
   But ye, O happy husbands, ye
   Walking? The landscape tires the eye
   And viewed the door with cunning eye.
   Upon your daughters keep an eye,
   Tattiana gazed with curious eye
   I’ve scanned it with a jealous eye,
   The cynosure of every eye.
   Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
   Extinguished ashes do not blaze—
   No, never in the early blaze
   On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
   Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
   Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
   Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
   The hero we immortalize.
   Love’s pangs Tattiana agonize.
   Gifts such as these alone could prize,
   Having lost all in life we prize.
   A bristly bear of monstrous size!
   They made him feel inclined to doze;
   And who is not a tiresome thief?
   And honestly ’tis my belief
   Is ever ready with relief,
   This great discovery relief
   With deeper woe than others’ grief.
   Habit alleviates the grief
   Who in the agony of grief
   To whom are our misfortunes grief
   Our union would produce but grief.
   reign of Catherine II under the supervision of Lomonossoff.]
   To write of any other elf
   Than one’s own fascinating self.
   Then dressed himself...(*)
   _Kvass_ is of various sorts: there is the common _kvass_ of
   heavy obroks have at times been levied on serfs possessed of
   being waged between two hostile schools of Russian men of
   to assemble around a table on which is placed a dish or basin of
   _Jacob Borissovitch Kniajnine_ (1742-91), a clever adapter of
   a circumstance which perhaps accounts for the southern fervour of
   combined with amiability and strict morality; also a species of
   [Note 22: Refers to two of the most interesting productions of
   Stood as estranged from all aloof,
   Even beneath her parents’ roof
   The language of her girlish pleading
   However, Tania’s letter reading,
   protest too much.” The poet in all probability wrote the offending
   Istomina(*) the nimbly-bounding;
   Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
   in lieu of the forced labour or in consideration of being
   awakes to hear the tinkling of her lover’s sledge approaching.
   Espy him approaching,
   Onéguine’s letter!”—“Ah! the thing!
   Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
   I guard it as a holy thing,
   Shone pungent Satire’s dauntless king,
   As butterflies to blossoms cling.
   But why are your cheeks whitening?”
   hierarchy. There are fourteen grades in the Tchin assigning
   above the 7th hereditary rank is acquired. In the remaining
   water which contains a ring. Each in her turn extracts the ring
   of the theatres for the benefit of the menials, who, considering
   I’m o’er it ever pondering.
   The world is ever altering!
   Or, parable more flattering,
   Amidst successes flattering
   Free, in the blossom of his spring,
   In life domestic see a string
   b. 1753, d. 1814. Introduced to the aged Voltaire during
   “Svetlana” has been translated by Sir John Bowring.]
   Behold! orthography despising,
   Rousseau, I would remark in passing,(12)
   Eloquent raver all-surpassing,—
   At last my father gave his blessing,
   Her suit before my parents pressing:
   Attentive to the heart’s first beating,
   Follow up love—a secret meeting
   The tiresome man, her value knowing,
   “Lovage,” the _Levisticum officinalis_, is a hardy plant growing
   Of pictures painful harrowing,
   Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
   And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
   Metreless verses recognizing
   But send your grandson before long.”
   He thought to write, but labour long
   Weeping they loosed my tresses long(36)
   Existence calmly sped along,
   Who following Petrarch move along
   The days which to your youth belong?
   And thus he never fell among
   And oft at eventide a throng
   To whom amongst the jealous throng
   “Nothing, good nurse, there’s nothing wrong,
   With little knowledge and that wrong
   The Maidens’ Song
   With dance and with song.
   And led me off to church with song.”
   Either with him or thee in song,
   A double force unto their song
   Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
   Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
   Were you in love when you were young?”—
   Bard of the Finnish maiden young.(49)
   His harp beneath that sky had rung
   Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
   Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
   St. Petersburg.]
   [Note 17: The midsummer nights in the latitude of St. Petersburg
   brothers made his way to Constantinople and thence to St. Petersburg
   became Vice-President of the Academy of Arts at St. Petersburg.
   Make up your mind to go there.”—“Ah!
   The native Russian tongue impeach?
   Thus did our friend Onéguine preach:
   Alas! with merited reproach.
   Or to disturb my dreams approach
   Did not their lips with foreign speech
   Attentive listened to his speech,
   The Russian peasants are childishly fond of whirligigs, which
   Many an ancient legend which
   a similar contrivance in our own old-fashioned tea-urns which
   In monsters and fair dames was rich;
   Would she the canvas tight enrich
   slang term for a watch.]
   With gay design and silken stitch.
   I formerly admired her much
   You’ll find her portrait there, I vouch;
   ’Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
   My doom has been pronounced on high,
   “I call to witness God on high—”
   Sails her allotted course on high,
   And many a caravan on high
   The tiny sun shone less on high
   Careless of fame his spirit high
   And from the misty woodland nigh
   But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
   List! the snow crunches—he draws nigh!
   When separation’s hour drew nigh,
   But finally she heaves a sigh,
   And, heaving a regretful sigh,
   Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
   [Note 41: Hippolyte Bogdanovitch—b. 1743, d. 1803—though
   In scenes like these it may be though,
   How dark the night is getting though!
   To guess how you the eve pull through.”—
   My venerated reader, oh!
   They sent their compliments—but oh!
   Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
   Full many a glance like lightning flash,
   priests, and the black who inhabit the monasteries, furnish
   the white or secular, which is made up of the mass of parish
   attained with the 9th grade, hereditary with the 4th.]
   _Affectionately yours till death_.
   Or counting on his uncle’s death
   “tiaglo,” or family circle is broken up by his death.]
   Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
   And what the old man might bequeath.
      CANTO THE FIFTH
   Canto The Fifth
   [Note: Istomina—A celebrated Circassian dancer of the day, with
   Petersburg the banks of the Neva are lined throughout with
   Without the ken of parents both,
   occur to most that the apologist of the Russian fair “doth
   Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
   But memory like a serpent’s tooth
   The dusty chronicles of earth
   And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
   To dire contentment shall give birth
   “Elvina, my dear, come, give me thine hand,” and so forth.]
   “Drive on!” the cheerful cry goes forth,
   Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
   By the fine silver of the north.
   For him were but of little worth,
   utterances under its influence for what they are worth.]
   The last poor obol I was worth—
      CANTO THE FOURTH
   Canto The Fourth
   End of Canto The Fourth
   To the impressions of our youth,
   Found the ideal of my youth,
   Thee only would I choose, in truth,
   I
   I
   I
   I
   But were it not immoral I
   “Not in the least, assured am I!”—
   “My darling, growing old am I!
   Imagine! Here alone am I!
   Another! to none other I
   But with her elder sister I
   In former years thus did not I
   II
   II
   II
   II
   II
                        _Ovidii Nasonis Tristium_, lib. ii. 207.]
   III
   III
   III
   III
   III
   LIII
   XLIII
   XLIII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   VIII
   XLVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XVIII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XXXVIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XIII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   XXXIII
   LII
   XLII
   XLII
   VII
   VII
   VII
   VII
   VII
   XLVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XVII
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XXXVII
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XII
   XXII
   XXII
   XXII
   XXII
   XXXII
   XXXII
   XXXII
   XXXII
   place to a poem entitled “The First Snow,” by Prince Viazemski
      O my Svetlana.’—Joukóvski
   LI
   XLI
   XLI
   XLI
   from the basin whilst the remainder sing in chorus the “podbliudni
   Mutual repulsion and ennui,
   VI
   VI
   VI
   VI
   VI
   XLVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XVI
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XXXVI
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XI
   XXI
   XXI
   XXI
   XXI
   XXXI
   XXXI
   XXXI
   XXXI
I
   But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
   To listen to the words you speak,
   Vows matrimonial to break,
   Incessantly his chains to break.”
   The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
   Bruin is marching at her back!
   Himself transformed into a hack;
   Passes the torrent But alack!
   Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
   In truth he had the happy trick
   Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick—
   The artful prisoner should seek
   And thus secures the prey we seek.
   At times, if only once a week,
   They have invited you this week.”
   His Hellespont from bank to bank,
   godson who died at the age of ninety-two, having attained the rank
   And then a cup of coffee drank,
   She sank.—
   He’s a freemason, so we think.
   An oval countenance and pink,
   Yon silly moon upon the brink
   Alone he doth his claret drink,
   His fist Onéguine fiercely shook
   How bright and tender was his look,
   With his own pawn alas! his rook!
   His course unto the running brook.
   And clad in airy costume took
   Till absently Vladimir took
   But trembling on the mirror dark
   a portion of their heads shaved as a distinctive mark.]
   The sad moon only could remark.
   that strong hearty peasant women were to be seen at work
   ’Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
   L
   his imagination. His great-grandfather, Abraham Petròvitch Hannibal,
   Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
   [Note 47: The Abbé de Pradt: b. 1759, d. 1837. A political
   A fop, in dress pedantical.
   And cannot anything conceal,
   Of untold gain she must conceal,
   For promises her feet reveal
   The final two lines refer to the “Tchin,” or Russian social
   the state of the thermometer, cannot be said to have a jovial
   erroneously attributed to Lord Byron. “Salathiel; the Eternal
   He deemed of human life the goal
   The path which leads to glory’s goal.
   And others rise ephemeral!
   of the bride and bridegroom during the ceremony. The literal
   larger villages, which alone could support such an individual,
   are also much in vogue during the Carnival.
   In one thing really did excel.
   The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
   Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
   On him spleen mounted sentinel
   To such—delightful to repel.
   The Country Damsel
   Until her powers of running fail.
   A substitute for lamps we hail!
   She runs, the bear upon her trail,
   Across the gloom of heaven would sail
   Sorrow to counterfeit and wail—
   Lofty the chambers one and all,
   Exclaiming, “We must change ’em all!
   Nor years of separation all
   Indifferent he became to all,
   popularity amongst his countrymen is a fact familiar to all.]
   Her sentimental verses all,
   Morality taught scarce at all;
   He knits his brows—’tis silent all.
   God grant I meet not at a ball
   To slay himself with blade or ball,
   Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
   Yet as a rule their talk I call
   She soon forgot, began to call
   Was that which we are wont to call
   He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
   Enamoured at her feet to fall.
   And finally he deigns let fall
   They blossom, ripen and they fall
   Some future ignoramus shall
   I envied sore the billows tall,
   Silk tapestry upon the wall,
   The inscription o’er the gates of Hell
   Repentance wields not now her spell
   ’Twas not the first time, I can tell
   For your instruction here to tell
   The steward sent a note to tell
   “I am in love,” her whispers tell
   I am—in love—you know—don’t tell!”
   Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell—
   “How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
   To take this letter to O— Well!
   A worthy object ’tis, and well
   “The family are all quite well—
   Are all your relatives quite well?
   How thy hands burn!”—“Dear nurse, I’m well.
   Scissors both straight and curved as well,
   And gallicisms I love as well
   “My heart’s delight, thou art not well.”—
   Onéguine acted very well
   I have no leisure here to dwell,
   Ennui can in the country dwell
   And wished to say to him farewell.
   “Boredom, my friend, behold the ill—”
   “’Tis habit, Lenski.”—“Is your ill
   My unpretending page shall fill,
   And wisely gallops to the hill.
   The pervert world with icy chill
   By the old lime-tree or the rill,
   To listen to the rippling rill.
   His heart reciprocated still
   Domestic life attracts me still,
   “How now, Onéguine, yawning still?”—
   Or couplets more ingenious still;
   To wander through the meadows still,
   You fall in love again. But still—
   Time was, the poet’s tender quill
   No more at dawn the shepherd will
   Thus a guest with composure will
   ’Tis evidently Heaven’s will
   Oriental charm which so much captivated Madame de Stael.” It will
   As in their turn the seasons roll.
   Indites an inconsiderate scroll
   Perchance they laurels also cull—
   But I, in love, was mute and dull.
   Rings from a dish of water full
   Perched on a goose’s neck a skull
   “to lull.”]
   In order due the maidens pull;
   You know that I am now a fool—
   He was a dear delightful fool—
   A nursling yet for Hope to school.
   himself have called it. Indeed, since Byron, poets of his school
   Learn to possess more self-control.
   “Monsieur l’Abbé” a starving Gaul,
   Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
   And Eugene ever in her soul
   Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
   And now philanthropy his soul,
   Now don’t be cross with me, my soul,
   A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
   XL
   XL
   XL
   XL
   “sudarinia,” i.e. sir or madam.]
   Enchanted by the moon’s pale beam.
   And a boy handed round the cream.
   Guards fondly hope’s uncertain dream.
   Whilst all creation seemed to dream
   Eugene at first began to dream,
   The story of his young love’s dream,
   To the fair object of his dream,
   I will descant on love’s sweet dream,
   But sweeter in a midnight dream
   Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
   E’en from her cradle’s earliest dream,
   All this may be an empty dream,
   Thou’lt quaff love’s sweet envenomed stream,
   Thinking to float upon the stream,
   The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
   Of rural life the sluggish stream;
   Perish absorbed by Lethe’s stream.
   Awaiting on the shore I roam
   And a malicious epigram
   And love’s delicious diadem
   Merciful God, what will he deem?”
   Torquato Tasso’s strains I deem.
   ’Tis something of this sort I deem.
   Providence otherwise may deem—
   He hath acquired the world’s esteem
   But, as he never opened them,
   In three weeks would arrive for them;
   unquestionable. It undoubtedly owes its origin to Burger’s poem
   Is ever ready to proclaim
   With such a perversity proclaim.
   In winter by its blank and dim
   Of what not, and of distant dim,
   Silent, oracular ye’d see him
   Dared calmly cleanse his nails ’fore him,
   eminent English poets have been laid under contribution by him,
   Its driver seated on the rim
   From first to last page to the rim.
   He sang of separation grim,
   A country damsel’s album trim,
   In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
   Could not conceive how serious Grimm
   She waited for—I don’t know whom!
   Thus age approached, the common doom,
   Her health, life’s sweetness and its bloom,
   Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
   Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
   The forests in mysterious gloom
   _Simeonova_, a celebrated tragic actress, who retired from
   A street running parallel to the Neva, and leading from
   scientific and educational. The military and naval grades from
   And leans upon the monster’s arm,
   She nerves herself from her alarm
   The amatory science warm,
   In thy imagination warm,
   Fantastic images shall swarm
   the high dignitaries of the Church, and constitute that swarm
   Laid down his life of sun and storm
   which, at all events in its earlier developments, was of an
   [Note 40: The “Blago-Namièrenni,” or “Well-Wisher,” was an
   [Note 44: The _samovar_, i.e. “self-boiler,” is merely an
   Meantime I’ll finish whilst I can
   ’Twas plain—an oaken floor ye scan,
   has been carried off by a _kaldoon_, or magician.]
   essentially imitative type. As an example of his Shakespearian
   [Note 27: The foregoing stanza requires explanation. Russian
   [Note 16: Apropos of this somewhat ungallant sentiment, a Russian
   corsair, and carried a slave to Constantinople. The Russian
   “Christmas Carols” is not an exact equivalent for the Russian
   Trinity Sunday was at first deemed irreligious by the Russian
   [Note 10: _Denis Von Wisine_ (1741-92), a favourite Russian
   French was the language of the Russian court and of Russian
   _Katènine_ translated Corneille’s tragedies into Russian.
   Suitable for this semi-Russian.
   I’ve thought well o’er the general plan,
   Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,(1)
   “How came you then to wed a man?”—
   At last became a ruined man.
   Let me present ye to the man,
   _Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
   He was an honest gentleman,
   Deep into debt his father ran;
   “Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
   Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
   But when Tattiana’s hand had ta’en
   Which never have existed, e’en
   Perchance upon the Neva e’en
   Become a faithful wife and e’en
   My joy in youth was fleeting e’en
   Portray the solitary den
   the Winter Palace to the Summer Palace and Garden.]
   In her friends’ albums, time had been,
   There friends of pure delight had been
   Had a deluded victim been
   A fond and careful mother been.
   Obedient she had ever been
   And fields my joys have ever been;
   Their looks alone produce the spleen.(16)
   Was nothing but the British spleen
   The lonely mansion-house to screen
   Upon a bunch of lovage green;
   As your light footprints on the green.
   In springtime on the meadows green,
   Similar dames ye may have seen.
   From gales a hill behind was seen;
   Before him red roast beef is seen
   The torment born of crime unseen,
   Philosopher just turned eighteen.
   In little maidens of thirteen?
   His malady, whose cause I ween
   Her husband was a bridegroom then,
   His friendship I acquired just then;
   The cold reply with gloomy mien
   Approach not to hearken
   The tale of these romantic men;
   Amid submissive herds of men
   Whom, as the custom is of men,
   Having abjured the haunts of men,
   And isolated from all men,
   So inaccessible to men,
   Is no more cherished amongst men.
   _refined eulogy_ of the excellent qualities of our countrywomen.
   Yawning betook him to a pen.
   I know that Parny’s tender pen(42)
   The imagination to enliven
   By sympathy I have been driven.
   Onéguine was a citizen
   How deftly could he transport feign!
   An exile from their troublous reign,
   How bitterly he would malign,
   Dreading the world’s remarks malign,
   All bustle when he makes a sign:
   Landscapes thereon he would design,
   But boldly I myself resign:
   My heart’s allegiance can resign,
   Thine honour is my countersign!
   [Note 9: Paul Petròvitch Kaverine, a friend for whom Pushkin in
   are provided with a receptacle for a red-hot iron cylinder in
   the style of La Fontaine’s “Psyche.” Its merit consists in
   is “Doushenka,” “The Darling,” a composition somewhat in
   My gratitude do not disdain,
   To crush me with a just disdain.
   Listen to me without disdain.
   A dwarf adorned with tail, again
   Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
   Should dearly like a dance again.
   But to the garden once again
   The youthful lover once again
   That until Christmas comes again
   Of love again, and yet again;
   A maid hath oft, may yet again
   And agitate my heart again;
   It wakens in my breast again.
   Tattiana courage doth regain
   By an avowal just as plain.
   He there is master—that is plain;
   Who selfishly unmoved remain
   Can lower depths beyond remain?
   Would she in silence long remain.
   And gave himself but little pain
   And thus it is ’twould cause me pain
   And an habitual sense of pain;
   Spare yourself unavailing pain
   “My darling child, thou art in pain.—
   And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
   A ring she heard the ancient strain:
   Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain—”
   A case of books he doth obtain—
   My light productions to retain,
   His daughter’s book to ascertain
   Pursues phantasmagoria vain.
   And distance interposed in vain,
   He reads at random, reads in vain.
   I’ve wasted in amusements vain,
   Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
   Wherein we lately left the twain.
   The converse of our hermits twain,
   In solitude or worldly din,
   Three tears they dropt with humble mein
   For God’s sake, Lenski, don’t begin!
   With words of foreign origin
   Still everywhere, without, within,
   At morn an icy bath within
   He heard his soul’s complaint within,
   a short brilliant poem in praise of conviviality. Pushkin
   which Pushkin himself together with his uncle Vassili Pushkin
   18th December 1788 by a Russian army under Prince Potemkin.
   Where—”—“What! another eclogue spin?
   Pardon I ask for such a sin—
   She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
   In books he saw nought to condemn
   [Note 42: Parny—a French poet of the era of the first Napoleon,
   A canine face with horns thereon,
   And that unrivalled paragon,
   And gossip of the town and fashion
   Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
   The torrent of opinion,
   a noted “dandy” and man about town. The poet on one occasion
   But Tania ne’er displayed a passion
   The natural fickleness of passion,
   The youthful poet’s fond confession.
   Shall abdicate the bard’s profession,
   My friends, what means this odd digression?
   With quite a lachrymose expression
   He enters: rapidly discussion
   Who without more prevarication
   We all of us of education
   But Eugene, hating litigation
   With inexact pronunciation
   And tears of reconciliation:
   Tattiana was her appellation.
   A coquette loves by calculation,
   summoned the author, and greeted him with the exclamation,
   Enhances love in estimation
   Long time her young imagination
   Original imagination,
   She did not think “procrastination
   of three days per week rendered previous to the emancipation
   Their Jealousy and separation
   The fair of the next generation,
   Whose glance reflecting inspiration
   And eye which gleams with inspiration—
   The idols of their adoration
   In pages of a love narration
   The hero is of my narration!
   The poet’s fervid conversation
   Introduce verse in conversation.
   A charm with it in conversation.
   Without constraint in conversation
   Alone within his habitation
   A Vampire fond of meditation,
   An innate love of meditation,
   And buried deep in meditation,
   As formerly much agitation.
   And long internal agitation
   Russian authors more remarkable for successful imitation
   A love which knew no limitation,
   Thy meditative incantation—
   Thus, praised be God! a reputation
   Amid a serious disputation,
   Seeing in this no deprivation,
   To the sarcastic observation,
   [Note 21: The poet was, on his mother’s side, of African extraction,
   than for original genius. His most remarkable production
   content with a single development of Burger’s ghastly production
   With intellect and strong volition
   Meantime Onéguine’s apparition
   Quite a sensation; the position
   My very latest composition!
   And a determined disposition,
   For journalistic deglutition
   Rescue me from oblivion.
   moi, qui n’en croyait rien, je commençai de le croire, non
   Was worthy of that old baboon,
   And bends her mirror on the moon,
   Tattiana gazes on the moon,
   ’Tis silent—on her shines the moon—
   And now ’tis night, the guardian moon
   Submissive as if in a swoon,
   His wife was also mad upon
   Our fathers used to dote upon;
   his last visit to Paris, the patriarch laid his hands upon
   His head sinks slowly, rests upon
   Herself not knowing well the reason,
   And the cold beauties of the season:
   The works of Mr. Richardson.
   She was thus fond of Richardson
   The sleep-compelling Grandison,
   Or that adoring Grandison
   Was certainly no Grandison.
   Sailed silently in unison—
   There an imperious skeleton;
   Marat and Danton.]
   My verses, kindly meant, would earn
   He seemed for matrimony born.
   Viewed them with not a little scorn,
   Silvers the brook; the shepherd’s horn
   A jolly song and distant horn;
   Looms gray behind the mist and morn
   Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
   And modest, cheerful as the morn,
   Which ’neath her pillow lay till morn.
   Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
   Perchance you also soon may burn,
   My wretched Lenski’s fate I mourn,
   Then to some gallant in your turn
   Delighted glances in return;
   des tasses de blanc sur la toilette, mais sur ce qu’entrant un
   To freeze his finger hath begun,
   Yonder the household lad doth run,
   Across the smiling face of dawn.
   And dream of life’s delightful dawn?
   As when the tempest’s veil is drawn
   In silence shall I sit and yawn
   There is no path; the storm hath strewn
   On raptures, sorrows not her own,
   This northern summer of our own,
   Far from his Italy—his own.(4)
   When will the devil take his own!”
   Impelled to union with his own
   He left _you_ first, and I must own
   Must visit them. Come! you must own,
   The untutored spirit’s pangs calmed down
   Mushrooms for winter salted down,
   Their branches by the snow bowed down.
   And on the footstool sitting down
   And the fair sex as light as down!
   Her on a shaky bench sit down;
   I feel thou wast by God sent down
   gown.]
   The aged nurse in ample gown,(37)
   In a half-open dressing-gown
   You never since your nose have shown.
   Thus her perversity hath shown.
   But, to his uncle’s mansion flown,
   Still happier he who ne’er hath known!
   Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
   And bitter torment never known.
   What everybody long has known;
   Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,(*)
   Have latterly vexatious grown;
   Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
   To romp and play she ne’er would go:
   Whither at headlong speed doth go
   Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go—
   Whither that evening he will go.
   Kept lingering on as loath to go,
   “Good-bye, Onéguine, I must go.”—
   Which we experienced long ago.
   of the knight-errant Ruslan in search of his fair lady Liudmila, who
   The crafty spouse caressed him, who
   the “Nestor of the Arzamass” belonged, and their opponents who
   But say he was a genius who
   His daily occupations, lo!
   I cannot understand. But lo!
   Present me.”—“You are joking.”—“No.”—
   More troublesome than usual?”—“No!
   The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
   Pen, paper bring: the table too
   And usually despised it too),
   My beauty, thou art ready too.
   Inspired him with disgust and so
   only, as it is believed that agriculture in the north is so
   [Note 28: A play upon the word “venetz,” crown, which also
   letters. These consisted of the _Arzamass_, or French school, to
   the unpleasant bridegroom resorts to the graveyard and repairs to
   [Note 35: Marriages amongst Russian serfs used formerly to
   Or a professor in tulle cap.
   When captured in a schoolboy’s cap;
   Or at a promenade mayhap,
   With iridescent wing doth flap
   of useless drones for whom Peter the Great felt such a deep
   And all in snow is buried deep.
   Buried in meditation deep,
   Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
   Is waning. Yonder valley deep
   Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
   As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
   Arouses rustics from their sleep.
   Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
   Where is Onéguine? Half asleep,
   Far from the rest the pair would creep
   Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
   In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
   Across the stage still madly sweep,
   Like down from Aeolus’s lip,
   With one foot resting on its tip
   but made his peace with Napoleon and was appointed Archbishop
   Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
   The sudden rattling of a car.
   And breathe a drama in his ear.
   Forgive me! Such the love I bear
   All are constrained and fetters bear,
   _Come to my golden palace, dear_!(25)
   My heroine, Tattiana dear.
   I can’t conceive a little dear
   His cup unto his maiden dear.
   Even as the love of children dear.
   Of roses to romancers dear;
   Unseen thou wast already dear.
   Wholly beside herself with fear,
   Omens inspired her soul with fear,
   The path of hope and tender fear—
   Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
   into the head-gear.]
   And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
   They wish that ladies should, I hear,
   Terrible tales she loved to hear.
   With sad refrain misfortune near.
   A friar black approaching near,(50)
   Epistles of six sheets or near,
   Mysteriously all objects near
   My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
   When youth’s rebellious hour drew near
   Shy, silent did the maid appear
   But still more stupid did appear
   Do me a favour and appear.
   So irremissible appear?
   Would at the proper time appear.
   Love to inspire doth woe appear
   Would once in powdered wig appear;
   Go, on the Neva’s bank appear,
   Doth in us or our names appear(26)
   Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
   The shining orbs of night appear;
   Modest yet daring! And a tear
   Had let fall many a bitter tear:
   Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
   For us, may be for many a year.
   And grown more curious by far
   And from the Millionaya afar(19)
   Or the mysterious Sbogar.(33)
   Just placed the entrance door ajar.
   devoted themselves to the cultivation of the vernacular.]
   has now to search for the very names of most of the popular
   The swain of Julia Wolmar,
   Malek Adel and De Linar,(31)
                          But ever the Hussar.”]
   [Note 39: It is well known that until the reign of the late Tsar
   And hat surnamed a “Bolivar”(6)
   _samovar_.]
      “Within him daily see the the fires of punch and war,
   Though hitherto a lady ne’er
   On waves by tempests curdled o’er!
   Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o’er.
   Now her lithe form she arches o’er
   So ancient warriors, battles o’er,
   Spanned the unbridled torrent o’er;
   maiden to elope. Instead of riding to a church or bridal chamber
   [Note: Odessa, December 1823.]
   As in the timid forest deer,
   “At Làrina’s.”—“Hem, that is queer!
   Romance of love I pray refer,
   “Well!”—“I the elder should prefer,
   Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.(52)
   And traces with a slender finger
   Tania doth by the casement linger
   would have been amongst us still. He was four years younger
   Adroitly seized and carried her;
   “The younger, you’re in love with her!”
   Doth love’s incautiousness in her
   He leisurely adorns for her.
   But finally grew bored by her.
   Not a bad fellow was her father
   Though superannuated rather;
   The _obrok_ was a species of poll-tax paid by a serf, either
   imagination of Pushkin is well known. Shakespeare and other
   possessing considerable poetical talent was like many other
   and is vainly reproved for such blasphemy by her mother.
   Recent instructions of its mother.
   Gravely repeating to another
   Servant of God and brigadier,
   ‘La Morale est dans la nature des choses.’—Necker
   “sviatki” or Holy Nights (see Canto V. st. x), and the dreamer
   [Note 25: From the lay of the _Russalka_, i.e. mermaid of the Dnieper.]
   And courtier, fop, and usurer
   Confront thy fated torturer!
      A faithful friend to friends, of ladies torturer,
   I’ll sprinkle thee with holy water.—
   This was his social character.
   “The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!”—
   And read our newspapers scarce ever,
   At Russ she was by no means clever
   pancakes or “blinni” are consumed vigorously by the lower
   Hope with her fascinating power
   Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
   On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
   But with confused and bashful air,
   Lo! my Onéguine free as air,
   _Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
   Urging your droshkies swift as air
   Is occupied with Olga fair,
   To cheat the inexperienced fair,
   Books he abandoned like the fair,
   Beside our youthful heroine fair,
   I have dreamed many a vision fair
   The gossip of their ladies fair.
   And you, my youthful damsels fair,
   For Ay is like a mistress fair,
   Is it not true? the objects fair,
   The less we love a lady fair
   I uttered to my lady fair
   With the epistle of my fair;
   Describe in detail the affair,
   Pray is it not a tough affair
   Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
   A kerchief round her silver hair
   Cropped in the latest style his hair,
   With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
   He knows Kaverine will repair.(9)
   Sometimes by ready-made despair;
   Accents of rapture or despair
   The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
   Flies past the porter to the stair,
   seem to assume this virtue if they have it not, and we take their
   ’Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_”(24)
   She cannot draw a breath or stir.
   is a species of thick pelisse worn over the “sarafan,” or
   phrase. “Podbliudni pessni,” are literally “dish songs,” or
   or “nyets”—the final s being a contraction of “sudar” or
   Lest the malicious reader or
   Nights, which extend from Christmas to Twelfth Night, for
   note) received an additional lot of the communal land for
   [Note: Stanza left unfinished by the author.]
      Upon the fields of Mars a gallant warrior,
   But gray Phillippevna the door
   She cannot—Eugene oped the door
   She peeped through a chink of the door.
   And beats with rapid foot the floor.
   Upon the ball-room’s glassy floor
   Comfort and succour to the poor,
      “Perdiderint quum me _duo_ crimina, carmen et error,
   Some one or other editor
   And wheresoe’er thy footsteps err,
   [Note 8: Talon, a famous St. Petersburg restaurateur.]
   [Note 23: The _barshtchina_ was the corvée, or forced labour
   Impressionable for an hour,
   graceful phraseology, and a strong pervading sense of humour.]
   Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
   him to be baptized at Vilnius. Subsequently one of Hannibal’s
   [Note 31: The heroes of two romances much in vogue in Pushkin’s
   than the late Mr. Thomas Carlyle. The decadence of Richardson’s
   He always replied “da” or “nyet,” yes or no, instead of “das”
   [Note 38: A Russian annotator complains that the poet has
   marriages was regulated by Tsar Nicholas.]
   [Note 51: Refers to the “Sviatki” or Holy Nights between Christmas
   Ch. Nodier. “The Vampire,” a tale published in 1819, was
   [Note 46: Yazykoff, a poet contemporary with Pushkin. He was
   In this case quite mistaken was.
   this poem was written literary warfare more or less open was
   from the fact of two gilt crowns being held over the heads
   With tranquil air Onéguine leads
   Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
   She the delicious novel reads,
   Crunching the morning snow she treads;
   If they but heard domestic loads
   Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
   And rising from her bench proceeds;
   She drinks in those seductive deeds!
   The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,(15)
   Are ye replaced by other maids
   Tattiana to a corner, bids
   And gradually day unfolds.
   In winter, when Night longer holds
   Capers applauds with clap of hands,
   Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
   His son and mortgages his lands.
   Nor beauties of far distant lands
   Nor homage which the Muse demands
   Obedient to warm Spring’s commands.
   Thus in the earth the seed expands
   The steed benumbed still pawing stands
   Where each young critic ready stands,
   The father scarcely understands
   And care but little for its ends.
   At times my reason almost bends,
   Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
   No one my anguish comprehends,
   Of frivolous existence, friends;
   Against my inclination, friends,
   I’ve had to make for having friends!
   Existence without wife or friends,
   But little warmth the fireplace lends,
   The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
   His hate by slander, and who spends
   With love which happiness extends;
   The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
   And her voice sweeter than the sounds
   Appear attuned to softer chords;
   At least their accents and their words
   My goddesses, where are your shades?
   Tattiana motionless abides.
   The unbidden guests he roughly chides—
   In scarlet cap revolving glides.
   A crab upon a spider rides,
   May be that I by heaven’s decrees
   The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
   And nothing more important sees;
   She fears and like an arrow rushes
   Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
   Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
   Both for the nails and for the tushes.
   the best known of his tragedies.
   And all thy precious elegies,
   Around the garden homeward hies.
   And overcome antipathies
   The shutters open; to the skies
   But lonely beneath Finnish skies
   Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
   When the same life before him lies
   A sportsman who in covert lies.
   Look through the window and kill flies.
   From hall to yard and garden flies,
   And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
   What more’s required? The world replies,
   Ever to hear the same replies
   All breathless and without replies.
   Had come both friends and enemies—
   His friends and also enemies
   And the bad book accompanies.
   Thrice happy who their agonies
   Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
   Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
   She from the winter corn espies
   Some a mazurka occupies,
   authors of Pushkin’s day and rummage biographical dictionaries
   He roars, and “Ah!” Tattiana cries.
   ’Tis silent all! Alone the cries
   Upon those pages she descries
   Even the rosy wafer dries
   With raspberries, cherries.
   And pelt him with cherries,
   To peer into the future tries.
   At neighbouring hospitalities.
   Spared him not their asperities.
   The country hath its liberties
   Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
   And in her grasp the letter shakes,
   Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
   He now a full possession takes,
   Without grammatical mistakes.
   The third at night. Tattiana wakes
   May be, and this my terror wakes,
   Or else (I deal not here in jokes),
   devant moi. Je jugeai qu’un homme qui passe deux heures tous les
   Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
   To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
   Alas! he loved as in our times
   I sail upon my lake at times
   And due precautions take betimes.
   And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
   Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
   Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
   Had to compose in secret rhymes,
   Attentive be unto my rhymes
   And an enchanting shoulder shines
   Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
   of Malines.]
   Her head upon her breast declines
   Upon her elbow she reclines,
   Longer the East inert reclines
   Upward in a thin stream inclines.
   Wherein love innocently pines.
   The golden ember now enshrines,
   Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
   Eve and Twelfth Night. Divination, or the telling of fortunes
   Yes! every one must have his foes,
   Esteemed him much as the world goes.
   Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
   All arise. To the door he goes.
   All vanished as an echo goes.
   Winter! The peasant blithely goes
   Between the stalls, along the toes;
   The accents wild of other’s woes,
   But nought for this Tattiana cares.
   With hisses Cleopatra scares,
   The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
   And thus ancestral dust reveres.
   Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
   And still the coachmen round the fires(11)
   And youthful madness, youthful fires.
   Compassion now or wrath inspires
   Forgive the fever youth inspires,
   And now his youthful heart desires
   And of the irksome harness tires,
   important work, written 1817-20. It is a tale relating the adventures
   labouring classes.]
   [Note 50: The Russian clergy are divided into two classes:
   Seated, a curious look with glasses
   Shouts of applause! Onéguine passes
   system, might lead to great abuses.]
   Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fêtes;
   In true interpretation hates:
   time of it. But in this, as in other cases, “habit” alleviates
   But wretched who anticipates,
   Nor in his dreams anticipates
   A trouble fell upon the sprites;
   _Qu’ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
   Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
   And what like menaces fatigues,
   Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
   Which shines with iridescent hues.
   By poor Tattiana in the blues;
   All which caprice and affluence craves,
   Across the Baltic’s salt sea waves,
   Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!(51)
   When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
   Thus our light race grows up and lives,
   The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
   Beats that of friends and relatives:
   Our liberty at least survives:
   To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
   Before her straight with roguish eyes.
   Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
   And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
   But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
   At the same hour she oped her eyes
   Not daring to cast back her eyes.
   Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
   Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
   For tallow, wood and other things
   _The peasants there are rich as kings,
   Disperse yourselves, darlings,
   All that industrial London brings
   All this in many cases brings
   Happy and glorious_. But this brings
   And now she skips and now she springs
   Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
   Obedient to the magic strings,
   With late repentance gnaws and stings.
   Slow circling round its fellow swings
   The time between the wolf and dogs—
   How pleasantly the evening jogs
   Secret excursions made in sleighs;
   Tattiana moans and now she sighs
   Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
   Goddess of lovers’ tender sighs.
   lyric poet of some originality and talent. The “Feasts” is
   the youth’s head and exclaimed: “Mon cher Tibulle.” He is
   Exceptionless as no rule is,
   And deem the world perfection is!
   “Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
   pronounced entirely original, though its intrinsic beauty is
   his own grave, from which he has recently issued to execute his
   [Note 30: “Svetlana,” a short poem by Joukóvski, upon which his
   for the purpose of ransoming him; but Peter would not surrender his
   Madame Krudener. The frequent mention in the course of this
   Eugene, more tolerant than this
   purposes of divination. Reference will again be made to this
   I just hint, in parenthesis,
   But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
   Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
   And terrify a swarm of ducks,
   Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks,
   He who hath lived and living, thinks,
   A horse’s hoofs she hears—She shrinks!
   He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
   In the meantime her spirit sinks,
   [Note 48: The “kibitka,” properly speaking, whether on wheels
   Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
   May yet be studious of his nails;
   And beckon to the passing sails.
   Custom the despot soon prevails.
   When the sonorous Bréguet tells
   [Note 52: During the “sviatki” it is a common custom for the girls
   Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
   For rural solitude and dreams,
   ‘Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
   To agitate me in my dreams.
   This wicked, that absurd he deems,
   Their memory lingers still and seems
   Barely to draw her breath she seems,
   This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
   And more imagination teems.
   When evening o’er the landscape looms,
   A windmill too a jig performs
   And wildly waves its arms and storms;
   Disport yourselves, maidens,
   The frolics of maidens.
   The secrets of maidens.
   Young maidens, fair maidens,
   very far north, though an inhabitant of our own kitchen gardens.
   To secrets of virgins,
   Friends and companions,
   occasions.]
   Old people’s simple conversations
   Their offspring’s innocent flirtations
   Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
   Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
   to procure them, at any rate in the large towns.
   But to Onéguine! _A propos!_
   All covered up with snow in heaps,
   ’Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
   A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
   A little virgin mirror peeps.
   The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
   Impatiently the gallery stamps,
   With smiling face he Lenski hears;
   Although the destined coffin nears,
   The silent fields no peasant nears,
   Tattiana in the yard appears
   Nearer they come—Eugene appears!
   With his ferocious mate appears.
   And what from its recess appears?
   Her weary eyes are filled with tears—
   Likewise an epitaph with tears
   For dolls, e’en from her earliest years,
   Have shone as one of fashion’s leaders.
   Onéguine, O my gentle readers,
   Old age through spectacles too peers,
   And judgment which unsteady veers
   Tattiana certainly infers
   She ne’er repeated unto hers.
   Nor boston nor the world’s affairs
   To the theatre he repairs
   He to the festival repairs,
   ’Tis day, the family downstairs,
   A moment effervescing stirs,
   But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
   And hated casual visitors,
   And the kind-hearted servitors:
   With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
   Judge then what roses would be ours,
   I see you weep. Those tears of yours
   Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
   The manners of the highest class
   And breathes upon the chilly glass,
   Would loiter by the looking-glass,
   And from his dressing-room would pass
   By bee and butterfly which pass.
   Unseen in thick and tangled grass
   Yet satiated with success,
   Thus oft—this I myself confess—
   How flourish, why and wherefore less
   “If the domestic hearth could bless—
   Me your perfections would not bless;
   Also their feet—yet ne’ertheless
   With fir-trees standing motionless
   Love, flowers, the country, idleness
   Men become friends from idleness.
   To loiter there in idleness
   A child devoid of childishness
   In melancholy loveliness,
   Her cheek of rosy loveliness
   By Heaven in lieu of happiness.
   “But strange am I to happiness;
   With laughter smothered weariness:
   And freezing fits of weariness.
   Attractive in its banefulness?
   With spiritual tenderness;
   Inspired by whom this tenderness,
   The bays of age and helplessness.
   Those whom we ought to love, caress,
   Await the long-delayed caress.
   Whose hands indulgently caress
   The ladies, their fantastic dress,
   To array himself in evening dress.
   Meantime in matutinal dress
   Nor dares the skirting of her dress
   Or kiss the border of her dress.
   Conquer by passion and address,
   But Eugene long hath left the press
   A young Armida’s lips to press,
   She hears the bear behind her press,
   To fawn upon and love express;
   I like the difference to express
   Dally with a dishevelled tress
   Hymen’s embarrassments, distress,
   And though I read it with distress,
   Habit was given us in distress
   Nor discontinued to distress
   Tattiana’s letter I possess,
   If wife and children to possess
   If the raw product they possess
   This gentle daring who could guess?
   Alas! It is not hard to guess.
   The uncontaminated kiss
   Have felt love’s agitated kiss
   A lady’s hand doth never kiss.
   With tears, confused emotions, bliss,—
   This evanescent boyish bliss.
   Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
   But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
   Beside the thundering abyss
   Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
   As every journal now entreats,
   And stay whose length none recollects.
   Their coming which no man expects,
   Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
   Whom latterly one often meets
   Along Saint Petersburg’s paved streets,
   Though without palaces and streets,
   Past darkened windows and long streets
   Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
   Delicious visions, jests and fights!
   The fire of the nocturnal lights;
   And oh! what verses, what delights,
   the Russian poet has directly paraphrased “Leonora” under its
   With rapturous longing he awaits,
   Will teach grammatical conceits,
   _kvass_ of the restaurants, iced and flavoured with various fruits.
   With cherries, red currants,
   [Note 34: A young married couple amongst Russian peasants
   matins à brosser ses ongles peut bien passer quelques instants à
   Russian ladies unite in their persons great acquirements,
   take place at ridiculously early ages. Haxthausen asserts
   And like Napoleons each of us
   Well! Làrina appears to us
   Who labours hard to humour us?
   [Note 55: Lel, in Slavonic mythology, corresponds to the Morpheus
   an ode, “To Her,” which commences thus:
   A million bipeds reckons thus
   Corneille’s majestic genius,
   Yea! although rendered beauteous
   A critic of the stage malicious,
   And gloomy epigrams malicious.
   A slave of actresses capricious,
   To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
   The conversation tedious
   Oh! who is not calumnious?
   [Note 26: The Russian annotator remarks: “The most euphonious
   relative rank and precedence to the members of the various
   There Didelot became glorious,
   inducement lay in the fact that the “tiaglo” (see previous
   By such allusions scandalous,
   By Tolstoy’s pencil marvellous,
   With satisfaction marvellous,
   time: the former by Madame Cottin, the latter by the famous
   The drive becomes monotonous—
   Feeling is silly, dangerous.
   He shunned those parties boisterous;
   period; he possessed more originality than Kniajnine. “Œdipus
   Come sing we in chorus
   The friend of liberty and laws
   I long have ceased to offend the laws.
   Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
   And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
   And through the lofty windows views
   To male acquaintances he bows,
   The epitaph on marble shows:
   With all dissatisfaction shows.
   Misunderstanding, words and blows.
   And Comet champagne foaming flows.
   Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
   When Passion’s fire no longer glows
   And this the faithful one allows,
   Profiles of lovely dames he knows
   And all the joys which Winter knows.
   For otherwise—God only knows!
   The first appearance of the snows
   His pony sniffing the fresh snows
   Upon the dreary northern snows,
   On unknown female forms he throws.
   Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows—
   Of fiery youth’s untutored days
   To vary for a few brief days.
   We called to mind our youthful days—
   As the sins of my youthful days
   As partner of my mournful days,
   And then to meditate for days
   The very morning of our days.
   Companion of my childhood’s days.
   And I confess that now-a-days
   But even thus not now-a-days!
   In one of thine enchanting lays
   Consisting of harmonious lays,
   Or Bogdanovitch’s sweet lays.(41)
   No more with pale Diana’s rays,(17)
   With which blind Fortune oft betrays
   Nor interest in aught betrays.
   Alas! my stomach it betrays
   When he in ardent verse portrays
   Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
   splendid granite quays.]
   But soon she altered all her ways,
   Delighted much his former ways
   A joyous troop of little boys
   Who cannot conjure former joys?
   Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
   _Didelot_, sometime Director of the ballet at the Opera at
   Approach not to gaze at
   The passionate speeches I’ll repeat,
   I mean my name not to repeat.”
   I might to connoisseurs repeat
   A hundred times will not repeat,
   Now all things round about repeat
   Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
   And at economy was great;
   Alone amid possessions great,
   And cry: he was a poet great!
   A ball here, there a children’s treat,
   On this artistical retreat
   Till out of breath upon a seat
   Removed her to his country seat,
   “No misery I see in that”—
   Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
   Upon my lake I love to float,
   My friend, ’tis but to pay a debt,
   Of keen sarcastic intellect
   With so much warmth and intellect?
   Two verses he could recollect
   Where I can no more recollect?—
   So prudent, and so circumspect
   Such am I. This did ye expect,
   The disenchanted glass direct
   So full of piety, correct,
   Of the Æneid, but incorrect.
   Herein my portrait should detect,
   Faithfully shall I now depict,
   Wherein the child of fashion strict
   [Note 12: “Tout le monde sut qu’il (Grimm) mettait du blanc; et
   Three pairs of handsome female feet;
   Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
   Young ladies’ faces and their feet.
   Are oft deceptive—like their feet.
   A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
   The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
   O Brenta, once more we shall meet
   Where fashionable circles meet
   But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
   Your magic voices I shall greet,
   Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
   The words and looks of charmers sweet
   “To whom is it to go, my sweet?
   Ah! I still struggle to forget
   Without enthusiasm he met
   When in her walks abroad she met
   Where God alone knows whom she met.
   Of one thing till again we met.
   Of widow Clicquot or Moet
   The Poet
   The fair, nor parted with regret,
   Ere the bright messenger had set.
   And we—an unattractive set—
   Of every sort and every set!”—
   It will be by a mob beset
   For twice you came to them and yet
   “Then amongst strangers I was left—
   “Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
   Who secretly denounced the gift,
   Though deep he sinks into the drift;
   Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
   Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,(48)
   And by the world repeated oft,
   Raises within my breast as oft
   Born of a babbler in a loft
   Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
   But from the Muses’ loftiest height
   China and bronze the tables weight,
   In bullets, sabres, and in fight.
   All about Olga—to a light
   But wilful, frivolous, and light.
   The crowd and merriment and light,
   As a babe’s slumber, or the light
   Pour on this orb a dazzling light
   And showed with an uncertain light
   But lo! already the moon’s light
   Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
   The firmament in mellow light,
   Was younger than myself, my light,
   Of sunset glow with rosy light,
   Our hero stops and doth alight,
   In my young days of wild delight
   E’en for an instant find delight,
   The curse of commonplace delight.
   His spirit sank with strange delight.
   Abandoning insane delight,
   _Who in thy love finds more delight
   In such an album with delight
   They will receive us with delight.”
   A sense of social delight,
   He finally lost all delight
   And bless mankind with full delight.
   His ardent soul with full delight.
   And solitude and calm delight,
   And solitude and calm delight.
   The votary of vain delight
   Contemplativeness, her delight,
   And like the prisoner’s our delight
   I love its furious delight,
   And full of innocent delight,
   But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
   An ever transcendental flight;
   From you too Eugene took to flight,
   are a prolonged twilight.]
   Her movements, voice and figure slight,
   The china teapot too ye might
   If in the scenes of home I might
   And be as happy—as I might.
   Time was, a valiant general might
   Lay languishing both day and night—
   And breathe the balmy breath of night;
   Outside descend the mists of night.
   From her half-open vest of night.
   The moon, the stars, and shining night—
   The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
   But turning morning into night,
   How oft, when on a summer night
   That glimmered through the radiant night
   “Delighted.”—“When?”—“This very night.
   Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
   My morning birdie, yesternight
   In the first place, say, am I right?
   Seductive, animated, bright,
   And in a vision, sinless, bright,
   His ditties were as pure and bright
   Life lies extended, vast and bright,
   ’Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
   The goblet still is bubbling bright—
   Behold! the moon was shining bright
   Adorned with many a vision bright
   Was it not thou, O vision bright,
   In winter on the fender bright,
   Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
   The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.
   Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
   O’erspread with Winter’s carpet bright,
   To youthful Olga’s beauty bright,
   I was half silly with affright.
   Before whose inexperienced sight
   The height of fashion, fitting tight,
   I am not worthy them in aught;
   If they were similar in aught.
   As on the rapid wings of thought
   Because in singleness of thought
   ’Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
   Of harmony enshrining thought.
   A register of fleeting thought,
   Immersed in melancholy thought,
   She hears of conversation nought
   And my dark soul to light was brought;
   A table to the fire is brought,
   But trusted the ideal she wrought?—
   At first such contradictions wrought
   Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
   The early days of life we sought.
   The “in memoriam” pages sought,
   “kashourka,” or “kitten song,” indicates approaching marriage. It
   “warmer of the soul”—in French, chaufferette de l’âme. It
   Though we will not acknowledge it.
   own title, and also written a poem “Liudmila” in imitation of it.
   “Minor” (Niedorosl). Prince Potemkin, after witnessing it,
   Some day I’ll somehow finish it.
   addressed the following impromptu to his friend’s portrait:
   On guests their servants used to wait
   All Nature winter seemed to await,
   Must take a walk and rest a bit—
   Or, with a pen and colours fit,
   For maiden’s hearing deemed unfit),
   On winters of the south a skit,
   Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
   He somewhat blushing would omit:
   not of equal merit.
   This he believed: a kindred spirit
   Providence at length loses patience and sends her lover’s spirit,
   A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
   Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
   So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit—
   orders during the Carnival. At other times it is difficult
   E’en as the poet says he leant.(18)
   A letter for her hero meant:
   For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?
   As we lure the young gallant,
   Allure the young gallant
   On fresh allurements they are bent,
   And o’er the granite coping bent,
   The needle nor, o’er framework bent,
   Now talkative, now reticent;
   Because she was so innocent,
   affectionate regard of the youthful Pushkin when a student
   Haughty appear, subservient,
   That Heaven her character had blent
   Ne’er touched her fingers indolent
   Or torturer malevolent?
   Pushkin, then residing in Bessarabia, was in the same predicament
   I’ll pass beneath the firmament,
   une petite vergette faite exprès, ouvrage qu’il continua fièrement
   And pleasure’s daily blandishment,
   A timid love to banishment?—
   Ovid thus enumerates the causes which brought about his banishment:
   Having this mournful document
   She struggled hard at first thus pent,
   Two minutes they in silence spent,
   Obsequious or indifferent!
   Now it is ready to be sent—
      The country whereunto a mournful age thee sent.
   “You have a letter to me sent.
   Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
   Their heroes used to represent
   To a surrender gave consent,
   She heaves a sigh and deep intent
   But enough! Now, ’tis my intent
   And with his lot in life content,
   But was our friend Eugene content,
   First reconciled and then content;
      With self, society, existence, discontent,
   Time was, in style magniloquent
   Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
   ’Tis time she to the altar went!
   [Note 11: In Russia large fires are lighted in winter time in front
   A forest now she sees in front
   In spite of common sense we’re wont
   And in the final tome we learnt,
   A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
   Ourselves as unities to count;
   The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
   And consolation soon begot.
   To labour in his sledge forgot,
   Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
   What once I knew is clean forgot—
   Onéguine lightning glances shot;
   Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
   Inseparable from our lot;
   My country and an exile’s lot;
   Alas! how wretched now my lot!”
   “Leonora,” which has found so many English translators. Not
   To Russ indigenous are not;
   Keep your accounts! You’d rather not?
   Into the district then to boot
   Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
   Was a delightful little spot,
   Just manages a feeble trot
   Just before dinner-time he slept,
   By neighbouring families bewept,
   Because her passion wanted art,
   How soon he learnt deception’s art,
   Sometimes by pleasing flattery’s art,
   In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!
   Wherein I felt love’s fatal dart,
   Rekindled in my withered heart
   Imprudent prattle of the heart,
   And ease the tortures of the heart—
   Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
   Obeyed the impulses of heart?—
   Unknown as yet the aching heart,
   Confessions which a trusting heart
   Presentiments oppressed her heart.
   The fashionable rhymester’s heart!
   Wherein I buried left my heart.
   The fires of passion and its smart—
   How well he played the greenhorn’s part
   But Fortune cast our lots apart
   Then touching Olga they depart
   Who this soft nonsense could impart,
   A hidden meaning could impart,
   May well in innocence impart.
   False confidence or doubt to impart,
   Poetic transport. They impart
   Her passion’s faithful counterpart,
   Which from the devil’s bookcase start,
   Eugene designed with me to start
   His own antagonists expert,
   The heart of the inveterate flirt!
   An infant maiden doth exhort
   And no ridiculous report,
   Her girlish gaiety and sport.
   When the obedient doll in sport
   There is no fishmarket retort
   departments of the State, civil, military, naval, court,
   [Note 15: i.e. the milkmaid from the Okhta villages, a suburb of St.
   [Note 18: Refers to Mouravieff’s “Goddess of the Neva.” At St.
   As if it were some funeral feast.
   He was beloved: or say at least,
   Had not yet withered his young breast.
   Bard of the “Feasts,” and mournful breast,(43)
   ’Twas she who first within his breast
   To ease the anguish of my breast.
   I by the button-hole seize fast
   Which might for many ages last.
   Must e’en despise his kind at last;
   The fatal hour had come at last—
   A flimsy trace of musings past
   The laws of generations past,
   From shades of the relentless past.
   Or, after dinner’s dull repast,
   The gulf between them was so vast,
      Alterius facti culpa silenda mihi est.”
   In Russ her love made manifest,
   The credulous indeed are blest,
   Just so! that modest swain is blest
   The body they consigned to rest,
   A beauty languidly at rest,
   “Nurse, ’tis so close I cannot rest.
   Ye feel but little interest,
   Now with what eager interest
   Having once fixed your interest,
   And then made merry pope and guest,
   With this immoderate request
   Their idols they were wont to invest
   With what avidity and zest
   And so—God bless them, if He list.
   Am I to go through the whole list?”
   Their own productions, some insist
   So many neighbours here exist—
   They may forget that we exist.
   No greater pleasure can exist
   the 14th up to the 7th confer personal nobility only, whilst
   Satan will jest, and at love’s cost.
   When in as instant she is lost,—
   Romances pleased her from the first,
   [Note 49: The allusions in the foregoing stanza are in the first
   END OF CANTO THE FIRST
   [Note 1: _Ruslan and Liudmila_, the title of Pushkin’s first
   For treachery had done its worst;
   Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
   O’er all a sheet of silvery dust
   _Saturday Review_ of the 2d August 1879.]
   Who words and actions will adjust
   There! take it quickly, if ye must).
   Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
   And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!(47)
   Can we not stealthily make out
   Lenski his pencil-case took out
   “My chum lives here,” Bruin grunts out.
   Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
   The wind rose instantly, blew out
   All the young people round about,
   Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
   Within resounded shriek and shout:
   Their claims and explanations shout.
   Whilst the tired serving-men without
   A little Juvenal to spout,
   In the broad meadow a gay rout,
   Of creditors a hungry rout
   His comedies, a noisy rout,
   remplir de blanc les creux de sa peau.”
                             _Confessions de J. J. Rousseau_]
   But praised be God! in health art thou!
   The God of Love is after you!
   Demands that I translate for you
   V
   V
   V
   V
   V
   IV
   IV
   IV
   IV
   IV
   LIV
   XLIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   XIV
   Thus Boileau, in the guise of invective, eulogizes Louis XIV.
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XXXIV
   XLV
   seulement par l’embellissement de son teint, et pour avoir trouvé
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XV
   XXV
   XXV
   XXV
   XXV
   XXXV
   XXXV
   XXXV
   XXXV
   He offers her his murderous paw;
   I have known beauties cold and raw
   When in that company she saw
   And marvels deemed he thus should view.
   Because he yawned at the bare view
   I still a complication view,
   Russia’s Terpsichore review
   Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
   The triumph of a conquest new.
   Shall I your chorus hear anew,
   Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
   (Though certainly mankind he knew
   But upon all that Eugene knew
   Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
   Replace the visions fancy drew;
   I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
   Nearest and dearest knew not how
   Villages in the distance show
   What languor would his silence show,
   Would you to me this Phyllis show,
   They are all natural and low,
   And herds of oxen wandering low;
   Morning’s forerunners, breezes blow
   A feeble version read below,
   Park, garden, palings, yard below
   All the creations which below
   Which falls in starry flakes below.
   Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
   With its exhilarating flow,
   From happy inspiration flow,
   Nought from his pen did ever flow,
   Where plentifully feelings flow
   How full of fire his speech would glow!
   “I am in love, nurse! leave me now.”
   Her handkerchief she loses now;
   But such is not my project now,
   poem of romances once enjoying a European celebrity but now
   My tongue is somewhat rusty now.
   Then they came easily enow,
   Its insignificance I know
   And in the morning doth not know
   Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
   Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
   The first bright wreathing storm of snow
   And roofs near morn blanched o’er with snow;
   Till January fell no snow—
   Till carriage lamps, a double row,
   The horizon luminous doth grow,
   How charming Olga’s shoulders grow!
   And all your love on self bestow;
   X
   X
   X
   X
   X
   In this the love of the fair sex
   In love, although its tempests vex,
   IX
   IX
   IX
   IX
   IX
   XLIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XIX
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   XXXIX
   And also fashionable beaux.
   All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!
   I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XX
   XXX
   XXX
   XXX
   XXX
   Chained to his bedside night and day
   Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
   What, invitations? The same day
   Beside the stormy sea one day
   And in reality one day
   To anticipate the break of day,
   Listless is she the livelong day
   He sat, and then the livelong day,
   From Romulus unto our day.
   We visit about Christmas Day,
   And wholly occupied his day—
   Olga’s admirer came that day:
   As men who much had done that day.
   Jilted—glad of a holiday.
   To-morrow just like yesterday.
   Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
   In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
   Till morn—life uniform but gay,
   One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
   How sick to death his uncle lay
   Within his memory there lay,
   “How often in thine arms I lay;
   Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
   Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
   Who, heard the music of my lay,
   Arrange without the least delay—
   The bridegroom sage without delay
   “Bring dinner now without delay!”
   Then, her distraction to allay,
   How with thy medal I would play,
   A game of chess would often play,
   For the young poet they display.
   Some army poet therein may
   And though perchance a lady may
   Or by a card our homage pay,
   With boiling torrent dark and gray;
   Driving abreast three horses gray.
   Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
   “’Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
   Avowal then ’twas time to pray,
   Which rushed in eager dense array
   Here bottles stand in close array,
   The trees in silvery array,
   A cup of tea upon a tray.
   Nor doth my absent pen portray
   Minutely I will now portray.
   And thus unto her nurse did say:
   Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
   And starting suddenly doth say:
   It is called by the natives “doushegreika,” that is to say,
   “Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?”
   Alone beneath your rooftree stay
   There jars of cider block the way,
   His furs are powdered on the way
   He still made love in a queer way;
   Impetuously clove its way
   Nor did her blushes fade away,
   The starry beacons fade away,
   Without a chance to slip away.
   The mystic lines to tear away
   Lost in the hamlet far away.
   But borne in spirit far away
   Alas! Tattiana fades away,
   I write, and anguish flies away,
   And calmly sleeps the hours away,
   It whiled his idle hours away
   With serious air then went away
   Take to their wings and fly away.
   A hemisphere beneath her sway,
   [Note 33: “Melmoth,” a romance by Maturin, and “Jean Sbogar,” by
   The Muse appeared, when love passed by
   Onéguine sat the table by
   But I was sharp in times gone by.
   No trace ye left in passing by
   A boat with splashing oar floats by,
   inferior Russian newspaper of the day, much scoffed at by
   Alas! my friends, the years flit by
   At first, I clung to secrecy:
   Nor by her sister’s brilliancy
   Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
   French tragedy.
   And (elbows on the table) they
   More crimson every moment they.
   To idle musing was a prey;
   A lover’s letter might convey,
   Possess my love and sympathy.
   At least by show of sympathy;
   Eugene was touched with sympathy;
   I cannot tell the reason why,
   Already Autumn chilled the sky,
   When on the pallid eastern sky
   The nights of golden Italy
   Presents her quarto amiably,
   But Eugene, incontestably,
   Nor shall my pen paint terribly
   And now we hear delightedly
   stanza in a fit of Byronic “spleen,” as he would most likely
   Entrusted all to her sincerely,
   Tattiana would attempt to fly,
   The feet of graceful ladies fly,
   The evanescent fashions fly
   Alas! life’s hours which swiftly fly
   Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
   Harvests of souls unceasingly
   “Who will be there?”—“The family.
   And like Childe Harold gloomily
   Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
   And the far mountains daintily
   Terror assails her. Hastily
   With him were friends eternally:
   Danced the mazurka gracefully,
   Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
   His transports were quite maidenly,
   are used amongst us by the lower classes only.”]
   departments, civil or otherwise, personal nobility is only
   [Note 3: In Russia foreign tutors and governesses are commonly
   songs used with dishes (of water) during the “sviatki” or Holy
   Jew,” a romance by Geo. Croly.]
   is responsible to Government, may be paid. The abuse of early
   As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
   pessni,” or “dish songs” before mentioned. These are popularly
   Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
   Like Venus when, capriciously,
   Or into bold hands anxiously
   You’ll spend your winter famously!
   In the French language perfectly,
   “Then send your grandson quietly
   To lay two covers secretly.
   The same warm vision constantly;
   Employ your glasses constantly,
   She cannot—then impatiently
   Around her neck, now violently
   [Note 45: Count Tolstoy, a celebrated artist who subsequently
   And of the attic. Honestly,
   Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
   Having performed his service truly,
   fame mainly rests. Joukóvski was an unblushing plagiarist. Many
   He brought from mystic Germany
   Thou hast resigned thy destiny
   Then be it so! My destiny
   Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
   There is no stupid calumny
   She loved upon the balcony
   It occupied him from a boy,
   Instructed jestingly the boy,
   A labour, torment, yet a joy,
   In idleness and tranquil joy
   Wherefore? She found a secret joy
   Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
   The happiest days of life employ?
   Fearing his pupil to annoy,
   The feeble moment would espy
   And following them ye might espy
   Must now my stanzas occupy.
   But more the passions occupy
   She strains her throat to force a cry—
   Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
   Upon the windows tracery,
   By night prepared for sorcery,
   The clue unto some mystery
   To be a charming mystery:
   Alike by sighs and flattery.
   permitted to exercise a trade or profession elsewhere. Very
   Relate some ancient history.”
   Will pass; the same to-morrow try—
   Free, I renewed the idolatry
   Fragments of northern poetry,
   Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
   Byron’s capricious phantasy
   Carried away by ecstasy,
   [Note 24: The neighbours complained of Onéguine’s want of courtesy.
   Is full of frigid jealousy,
   Hope to conceal and jealousy,
   Lest jaded with satiety,
   Upon its damp opacity,
   Charming with grave simplicity.
   Of Russian domesticity;
   (Nonsense and pure absurdity,
   Discovered much absurdity,
   By dull insensibility,
   And then with blind credulity
   And husbands’ tedious amity?
   their lot, and they bear the cold with a wonderful equanimity.]
   And naked uniformity.
   Like him renouncing vanity,
   Hears not my importunity!
   Charming is your sincerity,
   As Winter in their purity,
   The style of wise antiquity.
   It carries of antiquity
   With hope and then perplexity,
   The child of sloth and liberty.
   Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
   Idolatry of liberty,
   Of tender years the modesty

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
I
   “My uncle’s goodness is extreme,
   If seriously he hath disease;
   He hath acquired the world’s esteem
   And nothing more important sees;
   A paragon of virtue he!
   But what a nuisance it will be,
   Chained to his bedside night and day
   Without a chance to slip away.
   Ye need dissimulation base
   A dying man with art to soothe,
   Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
   And physic bring with mournful face,
   To sigh and meditate alone:
   When will the devil take his own!”
   II
   Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
   Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
   By the decree of Mighty Jove,
   Inheritor of all his race.
   Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,(1)
   Let me present ye to the man,
   Who without more prevarication
   The hero is of my narration!
   Onéguine, O my gentle readers,
   Was born beside the Neva, where
   It may be ye were born, or there
   Have shone as one of fashion’s leaders.
   I also wandered there of old,
   But cannot stand the northern cold.(2)
   [Note 1: _Ruslan and Liudmila_, the title of Pushkin’s first
   important work, written 1817-20. It is a tale relating the adventures
   of the knight-errant Ruslan in search of his fair lady Liudmila, who
   has been carried off by a _kaldoon_, or magician.]
   [Note 2: Written in Bessarabia.]
   III
   Having performed his service truly,
   Deep into debt his father ran;
   Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
   At last became a ruined man.
   But Eugene was by fate preserved,
   For first “madame” his wants observed,
   And then “monsieur” supplied her place;(3)
   The boy was wild but full of grace.
   “Monsieur l’Abbé” a starving Gaul,
   Fearing his pupil to annoy,
   Instructed jestingly the boy,
   Morality taught scarce at all;
   Gently for pranks he would reprove
   And in the Summer Garden rove.
   [Note 3: In Russia foreign tutors and governesses are commonly
   styled “monsieur” or “madame.”]
   IV
   When youth’s rebellious hour drew near
   And my Eugene the path must trace—
   The path of hope and tender fear—
   Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
   Lo! my Onéguine free as air,
   Cropped in the latest style his hair,
   Dressed like a London dandy he
   The giddy world at last shall see.
   He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
   In the French language perfectly,
   Danced the mazurka gracefully,
   Without the least constraint he bowed.
   What more’s required? The world replies,
   He is a charming youth and wise.
   V
   We all of us of education
   A something somehow have obtained,
   Thus, praised be God! a reputation
   With us is easily attained.
   Onéguine was—so many deemed
   [Unerring critics self-esteemed],
   Pedantic although scholar like,
   In truth he had the happy trick
   Without constraint in conversation
   Of touching lightly every theme.
   Silent, oracular ye’d see him
   Amid a serious disputation,
   Then suddenly discharge a joke
   The ladies’ laughter to provoke.
   VI
   Latin is just now not in vogue,
   But if the truth I must relate,
   Onéguine knew enough, the rogue
   A mild quotation to translate,
   A little Juvenal to spout,
   With “vale” finish off a note;
   Two verses he could recollect
   Of the Æneid, but incorrect.
   In history he took no pleasure,
   The dusty chronicles of earth
   For him were but of little worth,
   Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
   Within his memory there lay,
   From Romulus unto our day.
   VII
   For empty sound the rascal swore he
   Existence would not make a curse,
   Knew not an iamb from a choree,
   Although we read him heaps of verse.
   Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
   But Adam Smith to read appeared,
   And at economy was great;
   That is, he could elucidate
   How empires store of wealth unfold,
   How flourish, why and wherefore less
   If the raw product they possess
   The medium is required of gold.
   The father scarcely understands
   His son and mortgages his lands.
   VIII
   But upon all that Eugene knew
   I have no leisure here to dwell,
   But say he was a genius who
   In one thing really did excel.
   It occupied him from a boy,
   A labour, torment, yet a joy,
   It whiled his idle hours away
   And wholly occupied his day—
   The amatory science warm,
   Which Ovid once immortalized,
   For which the poet agonized
   Laid down his life of sun and storm
   On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
   Far from his Italy—his own.(4)
   [Note 4: Referring to Tomi, the reputed place of exile of Ovid.
   Pushkin, then residing in Bessarabia, was in the same predicament
   as his predecessor in song, though he certainly did not plead
   guilty to the fact, since he remarks in his ode to Ovid:
                          To exile _self-consigned_,
      With self, society, existence, discontent,
      I visit in these days, with melancholy mind,
      The country whereunto a mournful age thee sent.
   Ovid thus enumerates the causes which brought about his banishment:
      “Perdiderint quum me _duo_ crimina, carmen et error,
      Alterius facti culpa silenda mihi est.”
                        _Ovidii Nasonis Tristium_, lib. ii. 207.]
   IX
   How soon he learnt deception’s art,
   Hope to conceal and jealousy,
   False confidence or doubt to impart,
   Sombre or glad in turn to be,
   Haughty appear, subservient,
   Obsequious or indifferent!
   What languor would his silence show,
   How full of fire his speech would glow!
   How artless was the note which spoke
   Of love again, and yet again;
   How deftly could he transport feign!
   How bright and tender was his look,
   Modest yet daring! And a tear
   Would at the proper time appear.
   X
   How well he played the greenhorn’s part
   To cheat the inexperienced fair,
   Sometimes by pleasing flattery’s art,
   Sometimes by ready-made despair;
   The feeble moment would espy
   Of tender years the modesty
   Conquer by passion and address,
   Await the long-delayed caress.
   Avowal then ’twas time to pray,
   Attentive to the heart’s first beating,
   Follow up love—a secret meeting
   Arrange without the least delay—
   Then, then—well, in some solitude
   Lessons to give he understood!
   XI
   How soon he learnt to titillate
   The heart of the inveterate flirt!
   Desirous to annihilate
   His own antagonists expert,
   How bitterly he would malign,
   With many a snare their pathway line!
   But ye, O happy husbands, ye
   With him were friends eternally:
   The crafty spouse caressed him, who
   By Faublas in his youth was schooled,(5)
   And the suspicious veteran old,
   The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
   Who floats contentedly through life,
   Proud of his dinners and his wife!
   [Note 5: _Les Aventures du Chevalier de Faublas_, a romance of a
   loose character by Jean Baptiste Louvet de Couvray, b. 1760,
   d. 1797, famous for his bold oration denouncing Robespierre,
   Marat and Danton.]
   XII
   One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
   His valet brings him letters three.
   What, invitations? The same day
   As many entertainments be!
   A ball here, there a children’s treat,
   Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
   Whither shall he go first? He’ll see,
   Perchance he will to all the three.
   Meantime in matutinal dress
   And hat surnamed a “Bolivar”(6)
   He hies unto the “Boulevard,”
   To loiter there in idleness
   Until the sleepless Bréguet chime(7)
   Announcing to him dinner-time.
   [Note 6: A la “Bolivar,” from the founder of Bolivian independence.]
   [Note 7: M. Bréguet, a celebrated Parisian watchmaker—hence a
   slang term for a watch.]
   XIII
   ’Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
   “Drive on!” the cheerful cry goes forth,
   His furs are powdered on the way
   By the fine silver of the north.
   He bends his course to Talon’s, where(8)
   He knows Kaverine will repair.(9)
   He enters. High the cork arose
   And Comet champagne foaming flows.
   Before him red roast beef is seen
   And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
   Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
   The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
   And Limburg cheese alive and old
   Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
   [Note 8: Talon, a famous St. Petersburg restaurateur.]
   [Note 9: Paul Petròvitch Kaverine, a friend for whom Pushkin in
   his youth appears to have entertained great respect and
   admiration. He was an officer in the Hussars of the Guard, and
   a noted “dandy” and man about town. The poet on one occasion
   addressed the following impromptu to his friend’s portrait:
      “Within him daily see the the fires of punch and war,
      Upon the fields of Mars a gallant warrior,
      A faithful friend to friends, of ladies torturer,
                          But ever the Hussar.”]
   XIV
   Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
   To cool the cutlets’ seething grease,
   When the sonorous Bréguet tells
   Of the commencement of the piece.
   A critic of the stage malicious,
   A slave of actresses capricious,
   Onéguine was a citizen
   Of the domains of the side-scene.
   To the theatre he repairs
   Where each young critic ready stands,
   Capers applauds with clap of hands,
   With hisses Cleopatra scares,
   Moina recalls for this alone
   That all may hear his voice’s tone.
   XV
   Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
   Shone pungent Satire’s dauntless king,
   Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
   And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
   The young Simeonova too there
   With Ozeroff was wont to share
   Applause, the people’s donative.
   There our Katènine did revive
   Corneille’s majestic genius,
   Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
   His comedies, a noisy rout,
   There Didelot became glorious,
   There, there, beneath the side-scene’s shade
   The drama of my youth was played.(10)
   [Note 10: _Denis Von Wisine_ (1741-92), a favourite Russian
   dramatist. His first comedy “The Brigadier,” procured him the
   favour of the second Catherine. His best, however, is the
   “Minor” (Niedorosl). Prince Potemkin, after witnessing it,
   summoned the author, and greeted him with the exclamation,
   “Die now, Denis!” In fact, his subsequent performances were
   not of equal merit.
   _Jacob Borissovitch Kniajnine_ (1742-91), a clever adapter of
   French tragedy.
   _Simeonova_, a celebrated tragic actress, who retired from
   the stage in early life and married a Prince Gagarine.
   _Ozeroff_, one of the best-known Russian dramatists of the
   period; he possessed more originality than Kniajnine. “Œdipus
   in Athens,” “Fingal,” “Demetrius Donskoi,” and “Polyxena,” are
   the best known of his tragedies.
   _Katènine_ translated Corneille’s tragedies into Russian.
   _Didelot_, sometime Director of the ballet at the Opera at
   St. Petersburg.]
   XVI
   My goddesses, where are your shades?
   Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
   Are ye replaced by other maids
   Who cannot conjure former joys?
   Shall I your chorus hear anew,
   Russia’s Terpsichore review
   Again in her ethereal dance?
   Or will my melancholy glance
   On the dull stage find all things changed,
   The disenchanted glass direct
   Where I can no more recollect?—
   A careless looker-on estranged
   In silence shall I sit and yawn
   And dream of life’s delightful dawn?
   XVII
   The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
   On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
   Impatiently the gallery stamps,
   The curtain now they slowly raise.
   Obedient to the magic strings,
   Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
   Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
   Istomina(*) the nimbly-bounding;
   With one foot resting on its tip
   Slow circling round its fellow swings
   And now she skips and now she springs
   Like down from Aeolus’s lip,
   Now her lithe form she arches o’er
   And beats with rapid foot the floor.
   [Note: Istomina—A celebrated Circassian dancer of the day, with
   whom the poet in his extreme youth imagined himself in love.]
   XVIII
   Shouts of applause! Onéguine passes
   Between the stalls, along the toes;
   Seated, a curious look with glasses
   On unknown female forms he throws.
   Free scope he yields unto his glance,
   Reviews both dress and countenance,
   With all dissatisfaction shows.
   To male acquaintances he bows,
   And finally he deigns let fall
   Upon the stage his weary glance.
   He yawns, averts his countenance,
   Exclaiming, “We must change ’em all!
   I long by ballets have been bored,
   Now Didelot scarce can be endured!”
   XIX
   Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
   Across the stage still madly sweep,
   Whilst the tired serving-men without
   Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
   Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
   Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
   Still everywhere, without, within,
   The lamps illuminating shine;
   The steed benumbed still pawing stands
   And of the irksome harness tires,
   And still the coachmen round the fires(11)
   Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
   But Eugene long hath left the press
   To array himself in evening dress.
   [Note 11: In Russia large fires are lighted in winter time in front
   of the theatres for the benefit of the menials, who, considering
   the state of the thermometer, cannot be said to have a jovial
   time of it. But in this, as in other cases, “habit” alleviates
   their lot, and they bear the cold with a wonderful equanimity.]
   XX
   Faithfully shall I now depict,
   Portray the solitary den
   Wherein the child of fashion strict
   Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
   All that industrial London brings
   For tallow, wood and other things
   Across the Baltic’s salt sea waves,
   All which caprice and affluence craves,
   All which in Paris eager taste,
   Choosing a profitable trade,
   For our amusement ever made
   And ease and fashionable waste,—
   Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
   Philosopher just turned eighteen.
   XXI
   China and bronze the tables weight,
   Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
   And, joy of souls effeminate,
   Phials of crystal scents enclose.
   Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
   Scissors both straight and curved as well,
   Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
   Both for the nails and for the tushes.
   Rousseau, I would remark in passing,(12)
   Could not conceive how serious Grimm
   Dared calmly cleanse his nails ’fore him,
   Eloquent raver all-surpassing,—
   The friend of liberty and laws
   In this case quite mistaken was.
   [Note 12: “Tout le monde sut qu’il (Grimm) mettait du blanc; et
   moi, qui n’en croyait rien, je commençai de le croire, non
   seulement par l’embellissement de son teint, et pour avoir trouvé
   des tasses de blanc sur la toilette, mais sur ce qu’entrant un
   matin dans sa chambre, je le trouvais brossant ses ongles avec
   une petite vergette faite exprès, ouvrage qu’il continua fièrement
   devant moi. Je jugeai qu’un homme qui passe deux heures tous les
   matins à brosser ses ongles peut bien passer quelques instants à
   remplir de blanc les creux de sa peau.”
                             _Confessions de J. J. Rousseau_]
   XXII
   The most industrious man alive
   May yet be studious of his nails;
   What boots it with the age to strive?
   Custom the despot soon prevails.
   A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
   Dreading the world’s remarks malign,
   Was that which we are wont to call
   A fop, in dress pedantical.
   Three mortal hours per diem he
   Would loiter by the looking-glass,
   And from his dressing-room would pass
   Like Venus when, capriciously,
   The goddess would a masquerade
   Attend in male attire arrayed.
   XXIII
   On this artistical retreat
   Having once fixed your interest,
   I might to connoisseurs repeat
   The style in which my hero dressed;
   Though I confess I hardly dare
   Describe in detail the affair,
   Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
   To Russ indigenous are not;
   And also that my feeble verse—
   Pardon I ask for such a sin—
   With words of foreign origin
   Too much I’m given to intersperse,
   Though to the Academy I come
   And oft its Dictionary thumb.(13)
   [Note 13: Refers to Dictionary of the Academy, compiled during the
   reign of Catherine II under the supervision of Lomonossoff.]
   XXIV
   But such is not my project now,
   So let us to the ball-room haste,
   Whither at headlong speed doth go
   Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
   Past darkened windows and long streets
   Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
   Till carriage lamps, a double row,
   Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
   Which shines with iridescent hues.
   He nears a spacious mansion’s gate,
   By many a lamp illuminate,
   And through the lofty windows views
   Profiles of lovely dames he knows
   And also fashionable beaux.
   XXV
   Our hero stops and doth alight,
   Flies past the porter to the stair,
   But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
   With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
   He enters: in the hall a crowd,
   No more the music thunders loud,
   Some a mazurka occupies,
   Crushing and a confusing noise;
   Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
   The feet of graceful ladies fly,
   And following them ye might espy
   Full many a glance like lightning flash,
   And by the fiddle’s rushing sound
   The voice of jealousy is drowned.
   XXVI
   In my young days of wild delight
   On balls I madly used to dote,
   Fond declarations they invite
   Or the delivery of a note.
   So hearken, every worthy spouse,
   I would your vigilance arouse,
   Attentive be unto my rhymes
   And due precautions take betimes.
   Ye mothers also, caution use,
   Upon your daughters keep an eye,
   Employ your glasses constantly,
   For otherwise—God only knows!
   I lift a warning voice because
   I long have ceased to offend the laws.
   XXVII
   Alas! life’s hours which swiftly fly
   I’ve wasted in amusements vain,
   But were it not immoral I
   Should dearly like a dance again.
   I love its furious delight,
   The crowd and merriment and light,
   The ladies, their fantastic dress,
   Also their feet—yet ne’ertheless
   Scarcely in Russia can ye find
   Three pairs of handsome female feet;
   Ah! I still struggle to forget
   A pair; though desolate my mind,
   Their memory lingers still and seems
   To agitate me in my dreams.
   XXVIII
   When, where, and in what desert land,
   Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
   Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
   Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
   Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
   No trace ye left in passing by
   Upon the dreary northern snows,
   But better loved the soft repose
   Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
   I once forgot for your sweet cause
   The thirst for fame and man’s applause,
   My country and an exile’s lot;
   My joy in youth was fleeting e’en
   As your light footprints on the green.
   XXIX
   Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks,
   Are admirable, my dear friend,
   But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
   Charms more enduring in the end.
   For promises her feet reveal
   Of untold gain she must conceal,
   Their privileged allurements fire
   A hidden train of wild desire.
   I love them, O my dear Elvine,(14)
   Beneath the table-cloth of white,
   In winter on the fender bright,
   In springtime on the meadows green,
   Upon the ball-room’s glassy floor
   Or by the ocean’s rocky shore.
   [Note 14: _Elvine_, or _Elvina_, was not improbably the owner of the
   seductive feet apostrophized by the poet, since, in 1816, he wrote
   an ode, “To Her,” which commences thus:
   “Elvina, my dear, come, give me thine hand,” and so forth.]
   XXX
   Beside the stormy sea one day
   I envied sore the billows tall,
   Which rushed in eager dense array
   Enamoured at her feet to fall.
   How like the billow I desired
   To kiss the feet which I admired!
   No, never in the early blaze
   Of fiery youth’s untutored days
   So ardently did I desire
   A young Armida’s lips to press,
   Her cheek of rosy loveliness
   Or bosom full of languid fire,—
   A gust of passion never tore
   My spirit with such pangs before.
   XXXI
   Another time, so willed it Fate,
   Immersed in secret thought I stand
   And grasp a stirrup fortunate—
   Her foot was in my other hand.
   Again imagination blazed,
   The contact of the foot I raised
   Rekindled in my withered heart
   The fires of passion and its smart—
   Away! and cease to ring their praise
   For ever with thy tattling lyre,
   The proud ones are not worth the fire
   Of passion they so often raise.
   The words and looks of charmers sweet
   Are oft deceptive—like their feet.
   XXXII
   Where is Onéguine? Half asleep,
   Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
   Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
   The drum already doth arouse.
   The shopman and the pedlar rise
   And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
   The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,(15)
   Crunching the morning snow she treads;
   Morning awakes with joyous sound;
   The shutters open; to the skies
   In column blue the smoke doth rise;
   The German baker looks around
   His shop, a night-cap on his head,
   And pauses oft to serve out bread.
   [Note 15: i.e. the milkmaid from the Okhta villages, a suburb of St.
   Petersburg on the right bank of the Neva chiefly inhabited by the
   labouring classes.]
   XXXIII
   But turning morning into night,
   Tired by the ball’s incessant noise,
   The votary of vain delight
   Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
   Late in the afternoon to rise,
   When the same life before him lies
   Till morn—life uniform but gay,
   To-morrow just like yesterday.
   But was our friend Eugene content,
   Free, in the blossom of his spring,
   Amidst successes flattering
   And pleasure’s daily blandishment,
   Or vainly ’mid luxurious fare
   Was he in health and void of care?—
   XXXIV
   Even so! His passions soon abated,
   Hateful the hollow world became,
   Nor long his mind was agitated
   By love’s inevitable flame.
   For treachery had done its worst;
   Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
   Because he could not gourmandise
   Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
   And irrigate them with champagne;
   Nor slander viciously could spread
   Whene’er he had an aching head;
   And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
   He finally lost all delight
   In bullets, sabres, and in fight.
   XXXV
   His malady, whose cause I ween
   It now to investigate is time,
   Was nothing but the British spleen
   Transported to our Russian clime.
   It gradually possessed his mind;
   Though, God be praised! he ne’er designed
   To slay himself with blade or ball,
   Indifferent he became to all,
   And like Childe Harold gloomily
   He to the festival repairs,
   Nor boston nor the world’s affairs
   Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
   Impressed him in the least degree,—
   Callous to all he seemed to be.
   XXXVI
   Ye miracles of courtly grace,
   He left _you_ first, and I must own
   The manners of the highest class
   Have latterly vexatious grown;
   And though perchance a lady may
   Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
   Yet as a rule their talk I call
   Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
   Then they’re so innocent of vice,
   So full of piety, correct,
   So prudent, and so circumspect
   Stately, devoid of prejudice,
   So inaccessible to men,
   Their looks alone produce the spleen.(16)
   [Note 16: Apropos of this somewhat ungallant sentiment, a Russian
   scholiast remarks:—“The whole of this ironical stanza is but a
   _refined eulogy_ of the excellent qualities of our countrywomen.
   Thus Boileau, in the guise of invective, eulogizes Louis XIV.
   Russian ladies unite in their persons great acquirements,
   combined with amiability and strict morality; also a species of
   Oriental charm which so much captivated Madame de Stael.” It will
   occur to most that the apologist of the Russian fair “doth
   protest too much.” The poet in all probability wrote the offending
   stanza in a fit of Byronic “spleen,” as he would most likely
   himself have called it. Indeed, since Byron, poets of his school
   seem to assume this virtue if they have it not, and we take their
   utterances under its influence for what they are worth.]
   XXXVII
   And you, my youthful damsels fair,
   Whom latterly one often meets
   Urging your droshkies swift as air
   Along Saint Petersburg’s paved streets,
   From you too Eugene took to flight,
   Abandoning insane delight,
   And isolated from all men,
   Yawning betook him to a pen.
   He thought to write, but labour long
   Inspired him with disgust and so
   Nought from his pen did ever flow,
   And thus he never fell among
   That vicious set whom I don’t blame—
   Because a member I became.
   XXXVIII
   Once more to idleness consigned,
   He felt the laudable desire
   From mere vacuity of mind
   The wit of others to acquire.
   A case of books he doth obtain—
   He reads at random, reads in vain.
   This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
   This wicked, that absurd he deems,
   All are constrained and fetters bear,
   Antiquity no pleasure gave,
   The moderns of the ancients rave—
   Books he abandoned like the fair,
   His book-shelf instantly doth drape
   With taffety instead of crape.
   XXXIX
   Having abjured the haunts of men,
   Like him renouncing vanity,
   His friendship I acquired just then;
   His character attracted me.
   An innate love of meditation,
   Original imagination,
   And cool sagacious mind he had:
   I was incensed and he was sad.
   Both were of passion satiate
   And both of dull existence tired,
   Extinct the flame which once had fired;
   Both were expectant of the hate
   With which blind Fortune oft betrays
   The very morning of our days.
   XL
   He who hath lived and living, thinks,
   Must e’en despise his kind at last;
   He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
   From shades of the relentless past.
   No fond illusions live to soothe,
   But memory like a serpent’s tooth
   With late repentance gnaws and stings.
   All this in many cases brings
   A charm with it in conversation.
   Onéguine’s speeches I abhorred
   At first, but soon became inured
   To the sarcastic observation,
   To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
   And gloomy epigrams malicious.
   XLI
   How oft, when on a summer night
   Transparent o’er the Neva beamed
   The firmament in mellow light,
   And when the watery mirror gleamed
   No more with pale Diana’s rays,(17)
   We called to mind our youthful days—
   The days of love and of romance!
   Then would we muse as in a trance,
   Impressionable for an hour,
   And breathe the balmy breath of night;
   And like the prisoner’s our delight
   Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
   As on the rapid wings of thought
   The early days of life we sought.
   [Note 17: The midsummer nights in the latitude of St. Petersburg
   are a prolonged twilight.]
   XLII
   Absorbed in melancholy mood
   And o’er the granite coping bent,
   Onéguine meditative stood,
   E’en as the poet says he leant.(18)
   ’Tis silent all! Alone the cries
   Of the night sentinels arise
   And from the Millionaya afar(19)
   The sudden rattling of a car.
   Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
   A boat with splashing oar floats by,
   And now we hear delightedly
   A jolly song and distant horn;
   But sweeter in a midnight dream
   Torquato Tasso’s strains I deem.
   [Note 18: Refers to Mouravieff’s “Goddess of the Neva.” At St.
   Petersburg the banks of the Neva are lined throughout with
   splendid granite quays.]
   [Note 19:
   A street running parallel to the Neva, and leading from
   the Winter Palace to the Summer Palace and Garden.]
   XLIII
   Ye billows of blue Hadria’s sea,
   O Brenta, once more we shall meet
   And, inspiration firing me,
   Your magic voices I shall greet,
   Whose tones Apollo’s sons inspire,
   And after Albion’s proud lyre (20)
   Possess my love and sympathy.
   The nights of golden Italy
   I’ll pass beneath the firmament,
   Hid in the gondola’s dark shade,
   Alone with my Venetian maid,
   Now talkative, now reticent;
   From her my lips shall learn the tongue
   Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
   [Note 20: The strong influence exercised by Byron’s genius on the
   imagination of Pushkin is well known. Shakespeare and other
   English dramatists had also their share in influencing his mind,
   which, at all events in its earlier developments, was of an
   essentially imitative type. As an example of his Shakespearian
   tastes, see his poem of “Angelo,” founded upon “Measure for Measure.”]
   XLIV
   When will my hour of freedom come!
   Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
   Awaiting on the shore I roam
   And beckon to the passing sails.
   Upon the highway of the sea
   When shall I wing my passage free
   On waves by tempests curdled o’er!
   ’Tis time to quit this weary shore
   So uncongenial to my mind,
   To dream upon the sunny strand
   Of Africa, ancestral land,(21)
   Of dreary Russia left behind,
   Wherein I felt love’s fatal dart,
   Wherein I buried left my heart.
   [Note 21: The poet was, on his mother’s side, of African extraction,
   a circumstance which perhaps accounts for the southern fervour of
   his imagination. His great-grandfather, Abraham Petròvitch Hannibal,
   was seized on the coast of Africa when eight years of age by a
   corsair, and carried a slave to Constantinople. The Russian
   Ambassador bought and presented him to Peter the Great who caused
   him to be baptized at Vilnius. Subsequently one of Hannibal’s
   brothers made his way to Constantinople and thence to St. Petersburg
   for the purpose of ransoming him; but Peter would not surrender his
   godson who died at the age of ninety-two, having attained the rank
   of general in the Russian service.]
   XLV
   Eugene designed with me to start
   And visit many a foreign clime,
   But Fortune cast our lots apart
   For a protracted space of time.
   Just at that time his father died,
   And soon Onéguine’s door beside
   Of creditors a hungry rout
   Their claims and explanations shout.
   But Eugene, hating litigation
   And with his lot in life content,
   To a surrender gave consent,
   Seeing in this no deprivation,
   Or counting on his uncle’s death
   And what the old man might bequeath.
   XLVI
   And in reality one day
   The steward sent a note to tell
   How sick to death his uncle lay
   And wished to say to him farewell.
   Having this mournful document
   Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
   And hastened to his uncle’s side,
   But in his heart dissatisfied,
   Having for money’s sake alone
   Sorrow to counterfeit and wail—
   Thus we began our little tale—
   But, to his uncle’s mansion flown,
   He found him on the table laid,
   A due which must to earth be paid.
   XLVII
   The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
   And from the country all around
   Had come both friends and enemies—
   Funeral amateurs abound!
   The body they consigned to rest,
   And then made merry pope and guest,
   With serious air then went away
   As men who much had done that day.
   Lo! my Onéguine rural lord!
   Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
   He now a full possession takes,
   He who economy abhorred,
   Delighted much his former ways
   To vary for a few brief days.
   XLVIII
   For two whole days it seemed a change
   To wander through the meadows still,
   The cool dark oaken grove to range,
   To listen to the rippling rill.
   But on the third of grove and mead
   He took no more the slightest heed;
   They made him feel inclined to doze;
   And the conviction soon arose,
   Ennui can in the country dwell
   Though without palaces and streets,
   Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fêtes;
   On him spleen mounted sentinel
   And like his shadow dogged his life,
   Or better,—like a faithful wife.
   XLIX
   I was for calm existence made,
   For rural solitude and dreams,
   My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
   And more imagination teems.
   On innocent delights I dote,
   Upon my lake I love to float,
   For law I _far niente_ take
   And every morning I awake
   The child of sloth and liberty.
   I slumber much, a little read,
   Of fleeting glory take no heed.
   In former years thus did not I
   In idleness and tranquil joy
   The happiest days of life employ?
   L
   Love, flowers, the country, idleness
   And fields my joys have ever been;
   I like the difference to express
   Between myself and my Eugene,
   Lest the malicious reader or
   Some one or other editor
   Of keen sarcastic intellect
   Herein my portrait should detect,
   And impiously should declare,
   To sketch myself that I have tried
   Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
   As if impossible it were
   To write of any other elf
   Than one’s own fascinating self.
   LI
   Here I remark all poets are
   Love to idealize inclined;
   I have dreamed many a vision fair
   And the recesses of my mind
   Retained the image, though short-lived,
   Which afterwards the muse revived.
   Thus carelessly I once portrayed
   Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
   The captives of the Salguir’s shore.(22)
   But now a question in this wise
   Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
   Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
   To whom amongst the jealous throng
   Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
   [Note 22: Refers to two of the most interesting productions of
   the poet. The former line indicates the _Prisoner of the
   Caucasus_, the latter, _The Fountain of Baktchiserai_. The
   Salguir is a river of the Crimea.]
   LII
   Whose glance reflecting inspiration
   With tenderness hath recognized
   Thy meditative incantation—
   Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
   None, be my witness Heaven above!
   The malady of hopeless love
   I have endured without respite.
   Happy who thereto can unite
   Poetic transport. They impart
   A double force unto their song
   Who following Petrarch move along
   And ease the tortures of the heart—
   Perchance they laurels also cull—
   But I, in love, was mute and dull.
   LIII
   The Muse appeared, when love passed by
   And my dark soul to light was brought;
   Free, I renewed the idolatry
   Of harmony enshrining thought.
   I write, and anguish flies away,
   Nor doth my absent pen portray
   Around my stanzas incomplete
   Young ladies’ faces and their feet.
   Extinguished ashes do not blaze—
   I mourn, but tears I cannot shed—
   Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
   Time will the ravages efface—
   When that time comes, a poem I’ll strive
   To write in cantos twenty-five.
   LIV
   I’ve thought well o’er the general plan,
   The hero’s name too in advance,
   Meantime I’ll finish whilst I can
   Canto the First of this romance.
   I’ve scanned it with a jealous eye,
   Discovered much absurdity,
   But will not modify a tittle—
   I owe the censorship a little.
   For journalistic deglutition
   I yield the fruit of work severe.
   Go, on the Neva’s bank appear,
   My very latest composition!
   Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows—
   Misunderstanding, words and blows.
   END OF CANTO THE FIRST
      CANTO THE SECOND
   The Poet
   “O Rus!”—Horace
   Canto The Second
   [Note: Odessa, December 1823.]
   I
   The village wherein yawned Eugene
   Was a delightful little spot,
   There friends of pure delight had been
   Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
   The lonely mansion-house to screen
   From gales a hill behind was seen;
   Before it ran a stream. Behold!
   Afar, where clothed in green and gold
   Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
   Villages in the distance show
   And herds of oxen wandering low;
   Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
   A thick immense neglected grove
   Extended—haunt which Dryads love.
   II
   ’Twas built, the venerable pile,
   As lordly mansions ought to be,
   In solid, unpretentious style,
   The style of wise antiquity.
   Lofty the chambers one and all,
   Silk tapestry upon the wall,
   Imperial portraits hang around
   And stoves of various shapes abound.
   All this I know is out of date,
   I cannot tell the reason why,
   But Eugene, incontestably,
   The matter did not agitate,
   Because he yawned at the bare view
   Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
   III
   He took the room wherein the old
   Man—forty years long in this wise—
   His housekeeper was wont to scold,
   Look through the window and kill flies.
   ’Twas plain—an oaken floor ye scan,
   Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
   And not a speck of dirt descried.
   Onéguine oped the cupboards wide.
   In one he doth accounts behold,
   Here bottles stand in close array,
   There jars of cider block the way,
   An almanac but eight years old.
   His uncle, busy man indeed,
   No other book had time to read.
   IV
   Alone amid possessions great,
   Eugene at first began to dream,
   If but to lighten Time’s dull rate,
   Of many an economic scheme;
   This anchorite amid his waste
   The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
   By an _obrok’s_ indulgent rate:(23)
   The peasant blessed his happy fate.
   But this a heinous crime appeared
   Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
   Who secretly denounced the gift,
   And many another slily sneered;
   And all with one accord agreed,
   He was a dangerous fool indeed.
   [Note 23: The _barshtchina_ was the corvée, or forced labour
   of three days per week rendered previous to the emancipation
   of 1861 by the serfs to their lord.
   The _obrok_ was a species of poll-tax paid by a serf, either
   in lieu of the forced labour or in consideration of being
   permitted to exercise a trade or profession elsewhere. Very
   heavy obroks have at times been levied on serfs possessed of
   skill or accomplishments, or who had amassed wealth; and
   circumstances may be easily imagined which, under such a
   system, might lead to great abuses.]
   V
   All visited him at first, of course;
   But since to the backdoor they led
   Most usually a Cossack horse
   Upon the Don’s broad pastures bred
   If they but heard domestic loads
   Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
   Most by this circumstance offended
   All overtures of friendship ended.
   “Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
   He’s a freemason, so we think.
   Alone he doth his claret drink,
   A lady’s hand doth never kiss.
   ’Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_”(24)
   This was his social character.
   [Note 24: The neighbours complained of Onéguine’s want of courtesy.
   He always replied “da” or “nyet,” yes or no, instead of “das”
   or “nyets”—the final s being a contraction of “sudar” or
   “sudarinia,” i.e. sir or madam.]
   VI
   Into the district then to boot
   A new proprietor arrived,
   From whose analysis minute
   The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
   Vladimir Lenski was his name,
   From Gottingen inspired he came,
   A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
   A young and handsome galliard.
   He brought from mystic Germany
   The fruits of learning and combined
   A fiery and eccentric mind,
   Idolatry of liberty,
   A wild enthusiastic tongue,
   Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
   VII
   The pervert world with icy chill
   Had not yet withered his young breast.
   His heart reciprocated still
   When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
   He was a dear delightful fool—
   A nursling yet for Hope to school.
   The riot of the world and glare
   Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
   And by a sweet delusion he
   Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
   He deemed of human life the goal
   To be a charming mystery:
   He racked his brains to find its clue
   And marvels deemed he thus should view.
   VIII
   This he believed: a kindred spirit
   Impelled to union with his own
   Lay languishing both day and night—
   Waiting his coming—his alone!
   He deemed his friends but longed to make
   Great sacrifices for his sake!
   That a friend’s arm in every case
   Felled a calumniator base!
   That chosen heroes consecrate,
   Friends of the sons of every land,
   Exist—that their immortal band
   Shall surely, be it soon or late,
   Pour on this orb a dazzling light
   And bless mankind with full delight.
   IX
   Compassion now or wrath inspires
   And now philanthropy his soul,
   And now his youthful heart desires
   The path which leads to glory’s goal.
   His harp beneath that sky had rung
   Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
   And at the altar of their fame
   He kindled his poetic flame.
   But from the Muses’ loftiest height
   The gifted songster never swerved,
   But proudly in his song preserved
   An ever transcendental flight;
   His transports were quite maidenly,
   Charming with grave simplicity.
   X
   He sang of love—to love a slave.
   His ditties were as pure and bright
   As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
   As a babe’s slumber, or the light
   Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
   Goddess of lovers’ tender sighs.
   He sang of separation grim,
   Of what not, and of distant dim,
   Of roses to romancers dear;
   To foreign lands he would allude,
   Where long time he in solitude
   Had let fall many a bitter tear:
   He sang of life’s fresh colours stained
   Before he eighteen years attained.
   XI
   Since Eugene in that solitude
   Gifts such as these alone could prize,
   A scant attendance Lenski showed
   At neighbouring hospitalities.
   He shunned those parties boisterous;
   The conversation tedious
   About the crop of hay, the wine,
   The kennel or a kindred line,
   Was certainly not erudite
   Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
   Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
   A sense of social delight,
   But still more stupid did appear
   The gossip of their ladies fair.
   XII
   Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
   Lenski as a good match received,—
   Such is the country custom good;
   All mothers their sweet girls believed
   Suitable for this semi-Russian.
   He enters: rapidly discussion
   Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
   The sorrows of a single state.
   Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
   The young proprietor we find;
   To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
   And a guitar produced we see,
   And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
   _Come to my golden palace, dear_!(25)
   [Note 25: From the lay of the _Russalka_, i.e. mermaid of the Dnieper.]
   XIII
   But Lenski, having no desire
   Vows matrimonial to break,
   With our Onéguine doth aspire
   Acquaintance instantly to make.
   They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
   Or ice and flame, are not diverse
   If they were similar in aught.
   At first such contradictions wrought
   Mutual repulsion and ennui,
   But grown familiar side by side
   On horseback every day they ride—
   Inseparable soon they be.
   Thus oft—this I myself confess—
   Men become friends from idleness.
   XIV
   But even thus not now-a-days!
   In spite of common sense we’re wont
   As cyphers others to appraise,
   Ourselves as unities to count;
   And like Napoleons each of us
   A million bipeds reckons thus
   One instrument for his own use—
   Feeling is silly, dangerous.
   Eugene, more tolerant than this
   (Though certainly mankind he knew
   And usually despised it too),
   Exceptionless as no rule is,
   A few of different temper deemed,
   Feeling in others much esteemed.
   XV
   With smiling face he Lenski hears;
   The poet’s fervid conversation
   And judgment which unsteady veers
   And eye which gleams with inspiration—
   All this was novel to Eugene.
   The cold reply with gloomy mien
   He oft upon his lips would curb,
   Thinking: ’tis foolish to disturb
   This evanescent boyish bliss.
   Time without me will lessons give,
   So meantime let him joyous live
   And deem the world perfection is!
   Forgive the fever youth inspires,
   And youthful madness, youthful fires.
   XVI
   The gulf between them was so vast,
   Debate commanded ample food—
   The laws of generations past,
   The fruits of science, evil, good,
   The prejudices all men have,
   The fatal secrets of the grave,
   And life and fate in turn selected
   Were to analysis subjected.
   The fervid poet would recite,
   Carried away by ecstasy,
   Fragments of northern poetry,
   Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
   Though scarcely following what was said,
   Attentive listened to the lad.
   XVII
   But more the passions occupy
   The converse of our hermits twain,
   And, heaving a regretful sigh,
   An exile from their troublous reign,
   Eugene would speak regarding these.
   Thrice happy who their agonies
   Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
   Still happier he who ne’er hath known!
   By absence who hath chilled his love,
   His hate by slander, and who spends
   Existence without wife or friends,
   Whom jealous transport cannot move,
   And who the rent-roll of his race
   Ne’er trusted to the treacherous ace.
   XVIII
   When, wise at length, we seek repose
   Beneath the flag of Quietude,
   When Passion’s fire no longer glows
   And when her violence reviewed—
   Each gust of temper, silly word,
   Seems so unnatural and absurd:
   Reduced with effort unto sense,
   We hear with interest intense
   The accents wild of other’s woes,
   They stir the heart as heretofore.
   So ancient warriors, battles o’er,
   A curious interest disclose
   In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
   Lost in the hamlet far away.
   XIX
   And in addition youth is flame
   And cannot anything conceal,
   Is ever ready to proclaim
   The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
   Deeming himself a veteran scarred
   In love’s campaigns Onéguine heard
   With quite a lachrymose expression
   The youthful poet’s fond confession.
   He with an innocence extreme
   His inner consciousness laid bare,
   And Eugene soon discovered there
   The story of his young love’s dream,
   Where plentifully feelings flow
   Which we experienced long ago.
   XX
   Alas! he loved as in our times
   Men love no more, as only the
   Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
   Is still condemned in love to be;
   One image occupied his mind,
   Constant affection intertwined
   And an habitual sense of pain;
   And distance interposed in vain,
   Nor years of separation all
   Nor homage which the Muse demands
   Nor beauties of far distant lands
   Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
   His constant soul could ever tire,
   Which glowed with virginal desire.
   XXI
   When but a boy he Olga loved
   Unknown as yet the aching heart,
   He witnessed tenderly and moved
   Her girlish gaiety and sport.
   Beneath the sheltering oak tree’s shade
   He with his little maiden played,
   Whilst the fond parents, friends thro’ life,
   Dreamed in the future man and wife.
   And full of innocent delight,
   As in a thicket’s humble shade,
   Beneath her parents’ eyes the maid
   Grew like a lily pure and white,
   Unseen in thick and tangled grass
   By bee and butterfly which pass.
   XXII
   ’Twas she who first within his breast
   Poetic transport did infuse,
   And thoughts of Olga first impressed
   A mournful temper on his Muse.
   Farewell! thou golden days of love!
   ’Twas then he loved the tangled grove
   And solitude and calm delight,
   The moon, the stars, and shining night—
   The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
   To whom we used to consecrate
   A promenade in twilight late
   With tears which secret sufferers love—
   But now in her effulgence pale
   A substitute for lamps we hail!
   XXIII
   Obedient she had ever been
   And modest, cheerful as the morn,
   As a poetic life serene,
   Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
   Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
   Her locks were of a golden hue,
   Her movements, voice and figure slight,
   All about Olga—to a light
   Romance of love I pray refer,
   You’ll find her portrait there, I vouch;
   I formerly admired her much
   But finally grew bored by her.
   But with her elder sister I
   Must now my stanzas occupy.
   XXIV
   Tattiana was her appellation.
   We are the first who such a name
   In pages of a love narration
   With such a perversity proclaim.
   But wherefore not?—’Tis pleasant, nice,
   Euphonious, though I know a spice
   It carries of antiquity
   And of the attic. Honestly,
   We must admit but little taste
   Doth in us or our names appear(26)
   (I speak not of our poems here),
   And education runs to waste,
   Endowing us from out her store
   With affectation,—nothing more.
   [Note 26: The Russian annotator remarks: “The most euphonious
   Greek names, e.g. Agathon, Philotas, Theodora, Thekla, etc.,
   are used amongst us by the lower classes only.”]
   XXV
   And so Tattiana was her name,
   Nor by her sister’s brilliancy
   Nor by her beauty she became
   The cynosure of every eye.
   Shy, silent did the maid appear
   As in the timid forest deer,
   Even beneath her parents’ roof
   Stood as estranged from all aloof,
   Nearest and dearest knew not how
   To fawn upon and love express;
   A child devoid of childishness
   To romp and play she ne’er would go:
   Oft staring through the window pane
   Would she in silence long remain.
   XXVI
   Contemplativeness, her delight,
   E’en from her cradle’s earliest dream,
   Adorned with many a vision bright
   Of rural life the sluggish stream;
   Ne’er touched her fingers indolent
   The needle nor, o’er framework bent,
   Would she the canvas tight enrich
   With gay design and silken stitch.
   Desire to rule ye may observe
   When the obedient doll in sport
   An infant maiden doth exhort
   Polite demeanour to preserve,
   Gravely repeating to another
   Recent instructions of its mother.
   XXVII
   But Tania ne’er displayed a passion
   For dolls, e’en from her earliest years,
   And gossip of the town and fashion
   She ne’er repeated unto hers.
   Strange unto her each childish game,
   But when the winter season came
   And dark and drear the evenings were,
   Terrible tales she loved to hear.
   And when for Olga nurse arrayed
   In the broad meadow a gay rout,
   All the young people round about,
   At prisoner’s base she never played.
   Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
   Their giddy sports she ne’er enjoyed.
   XXVIII
   She loved upon the balcony
   To anticipate the break of day,
   When on the pallid eastern sky
   The starry beacons fade away,
   The horizon luminous doth grow,
   Morning’s forerunners, breezes blow
   And gradually day unfolds.
   In winter, when Night longer holds
   A hemisphere beneath her sway,
   Longer the East inert reclines
   Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
   And calmly sleeps the hours away,
   At the same hour she oped her eyes
   And would by candlelight arise.
   XXIX
   Romances pleased her from the first,
   Her all in all did constitute;
   In love adventures she was versed,
   Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
   Not a bad fellow was her father
   Though superannuated rather;
   In books he saw nought to condemn
   But, as he never opened them,
   Viewed them with not a little scorn,
   And gave himself but little pain
   His daughter’s book to ascertain
   Which ’neath her pillow lay till morn.
   His wife was also mad upon
   The works of Mr. Richardson.
   XXX
   She was thus fond of Richardson
   Not that she had his works perused,
   Or that adoring Grandison
   That rascal Lovelace she abused;
   But that Princess Pauline of old,
   Her Moscow cousin, often told
   The tale of these romantic men;
   Her husband was a bridegroom then,
   And she despite herself would waste
   Sighs on another than her lord
   Whose qualities appeared to afford
   More satisfaction to her taste.
   Her Grandison was in the Guard,
   A noted fop who gambled hard.
   XXXI
   Like his, her dress was always nice,
   The height of fashion, fitting tight,
   But contrary to her advice
   The girl in marriage they unite.
   Then, her distraction to allay,
   The bridegroom sage without delay
   Removed her to his country seat,
   Where God alone knows whom she met.
   She struggled hard at first thus pent,
   Night separated from her spouse,
   Then became busy with the house,
   First reconciled and then content;
   Habit was given us in distress
   By Heaven in lieu of happiness.
   XXXII
   Habit alleviates the grief
   Inseparable from our lot;
   This great discovery relief
   And consolation soon begot.
   And then she soon ’twixt work and leisure
   Found out the secret how at pleasure
   To dominate her worthy lord,
   And harmony was soon restored.
   The workpeople she superintended,
   Mushrooms for winter salted down,
   Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,(*)
   The bath on Saturdays attended,
   When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
   And all without her husband’s leave.
   [Note: The serfs destined for military service used to have
   a portion of their heads shaved as a distinctive mark.]
   XXXIII
   In her friends’ albums, time had been,
   With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
   Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
   And in her conversation drawled.
   She wore her corset tightly bound,
   The Russian N with nasal sound
   She would pronounce _à la Française_;
   But soon she altered all her ways,
   Corset and album and Pauline,
   Her sentimental verses all,
   She soon forgot, began to call
   Akulka who was once Celine,
   And had with waddling in the end
   Her caps and night-dresses to mend.
   XXXIV
   As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
   In her affairs ne’er interfered,
   Entrusted all to her sincerely,
   In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
   Existence calmly sped along,
   And oft at eventide a throng
   Of friends unceremonious would
   Assemble from the neighbourhood:
   They growl a bit—they scandalise—
   They crack a feeble joke and smile—
   Thus the time passes and meanwhile
   Olga the tea must supervise—
   ’Tis time for supper, now for bed,
   And soon the friendly troop hath fled.
   XXXV
   They in a peaceful life preserved
   Customs by ages sanctified,
   Strictly the Carnival observed,
   Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
   Twice in the year to fast were bound,
   Of whirligigs were very fond,
   Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
   When people with long countenance
   On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
   Three tears they dropt with humble mein
   Upon a bunch of lovage green;
   _Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
   On guests their servants used to wait
   By rank as settled by the State.(27)
   [Note 27: The foregoing stanza requires explanation. Russian
   pancakes or “blinni” are consumed vigorously by the lower
   orders during the Carnival. At other times it is difficult
   to procure them, at any rate in the large towns.
   The Russian peasants are childishly fond of whirligigs, which
   are also much in vogue during the Carnival.
   “Christmas Carols” is not an exact equivalent for the Russian
   phrase. “Podbliudni pessni,” are literally “dish songs,” or
   songs used with dishes (of water) during the “sviatki” or Holy
   Nights, which extend from Christmas to Twelfth Night, for
   purposes of divination. Reference will again be made to this
   superstitious practice, which is not confined to Russia. See Note 52.
   “Song and dance,” the well-known “khorovod,” in which the dance
   proceeds to vocal music.
   “Lovage,” the _Levisticum officinalis_, is a hardy plant growing
   very far north, though an inhabitant of our own kitchen gardens.
   The passage containing the reference to the three tears and
   Trinity Sunday was at first deemed irreligious by the Russian
   censors, and consequently expunged.
   _Kvass_ is of various sorts: there is the common _kvass_ of
   fermented rye used by the peasantry, and the more expensive
   _kvass_ of the restaurants, iced and flavoured with various fruits.
   The final two lines refer to the “Tchin,” or Russian social
   hierarchy. There are fourteen grades in the Tchin assigning
   relative rank and precedence to the members of the various
   departments of the State, civil, military, naval, court,
   scientific and educational. The military and naval grades from
   the 14th up to the 7th confer personal nobility only, whilst
   above the 7th hereditary rank is acquired. In the remaining
   departments, civil or otherwise, personal nobility is only
   attained with the 9th grade, hereditary with the 4th.]
   XXXVI
   Thus age approached, the common doom,
   And death before the husband wide
   Opened the portals of the tomb
   And a new diadem supplied.(28)
   Just before dinner-time he slept,
   By neighbouring families bewept,
   By children and by faithful wife
   With deeper woe than others’ grief.
   He was an honest gentleman,
   And where at last his bones repose
   The epitaph on marble shows:
   _Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
   Servant of God and brigadier,
   Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
   [Note 28: A play upon the word “venetz,” crown, which also
   signifies a nimbus or glory, and is the symbol of marriage
   from the fact of two gilt crowns being held over the heads
   of the bride and bridegroom during the ceremony. The literal
   meaning of the passage is therefore: his earthly marriage
   was dissolved and a heavenly one was contracted.]
   XXXVII
   To his Penates now returned,
   Vladimir Lenski visited
   His neighbour’s lowly tomb and mourned
   Above the ashes of the dead.
   There long time sad at heart he stayed:
   “Poor Yorick,” mournfully he said,
   “How often in thine arms I lay;
   How with thy medal I would play,
   The Medal Otchakoff conferred!(29)
   To me he would his Olga give,
   Would whisper: shall I so long live?”—
   And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
   Lenski his pencil-case took out
   And an elegiac poem wrote.
   [Note 29: The fortress of Otchakoff was taken by storm on the
   18th December 1788 by a Russian army under Prince Potemkin.
   Thirty thousand Turks are said to have perished during the
   assault and ensuing massacre.]
   XXXVIII
   Likewise an epitaph with tears
   He writes upon his parents’ tomb,
   And thus ancestral dust reveres.
   Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
   Harvests of souls unceasingly
   By Providence’s dark decree!
   They blossom, ripen and they fall
   And others rise ephemeral!
   Thus our light race grows up and lives,
   A moment effervescing stirs,
   Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
   The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
   And our successors soon shall drive
   Us from the world wherein we live.
   XXXIX
   Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
   Of frivolous existence, friends;
   Its insignificance I know
   And care but little for its ends.
   To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
   Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
   And agitate my heart again;
   And thus it is ’twould cause me pain
   Without the faintest trace to leave
   This world. I do not praise desire,
   Yet still apparently aspire
   My mournful fate in verse to weave,
   That like a friendly voice its tone
   Rescue me from oblivion.
   XL
   Perchance some heart ’twill agitate,
   And then the stanzas of my theme
   Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
   Perish absorbed by Lethe’s stream.
   Then it may be, O flattering tale,
   Some future ignoramus shall
   My famous portrait indicate
   And cry: he was a poet great!
   My gratitude do not disdain,
   Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
   Whose memory doth not refuse
   My light productions to retain,
   Whose hands indulgently caress
   The bays of age and helplessness.
   End of Canto the Second.
      CANTO THE THIRD
   The Country Damsel
   ‘Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse’—Malfilatre
   Canto The Third
   [Note: Odessa and Mikhailovskoe, 1824.]
   I
   “Whither away? Deuce take the bard!”—
   “Good-bye, Onéguine, I must go.”—
   “I won’t detain you; but ’tis hard
   To guess how you the eve pull through.”—
   “At Làrina’s.”—“Hem, that is queer!
   Pray is it not a tough affair
   Thus to assassinate the eve?”—
   “Not at all.”—“That I can’t conceive!
   ’Tis something of this sort I deem.
   In the first place, say, am I right?
   A Russian household simple quite,
   Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
   Preserves and an eternal prattle
   About the rain and flax and cattle.”—
   II
   “No misery I see in that”—
   “Boredom, my friend, behold the ill—”
   “Your fashionable world I hate,
   Domestic life attracts me still,
   Where—”—“What! another eclogue spin?
   For God’s sake, Lenski, don’t begin!
   What! really going? ’Tis too bad!
   But Lenski, I should be so glad
   Would you to me this Phyllis show,
   Fair source of every fine idea,
   Verses and tears et cetera.
   Present me.”—“You are joking.”—“No.”—
   “Delighted.”—“When?”—“This very night.
   They will receive us with delight.”
   III
   Whilst homeward by the nearest route
   Our heroes at full gallop sped,
   Can we not stealthily make out
   What they in conversation said?—
   “How now, Onéguine, yawning still?”—
   “’Tis habit, Lenski.”—“Is your ill
   More troublesome than usual?”—“No!
   How dark the night is getting though!
   Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
   The drive becomes monotonous—
   Well! Làrina appears to us
   An ancient lady full of grace.—
   That bilberry wine, I’m sore afraid,
   The deuce with my inside has played.”
   IV
   “Say, of the two which was Tattiana?”
   “She who with melancholy face
   And silent as the maid Svetlana(30)
   Hard by the window took her place.”—
   “The younger, you’re in love with her!”
   “Well!”—“I the elder should prefer,
   Were I like you a bard by trade—
   In Olga’s face no life’s displayed.
   ’Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
   An oval countenance and pink,
   Yon silly moon upon the brink
   Of the horizon she is like!”—
   Vladimir something curtly said
   Nor further comment that night made.
   [Note 30: “Svetlana,” a short poem by Joukóvski, upon which his
   fame mainly rests. Joukóvski was an unblushing plagiarist. Many
   eminent English poets have been laid under contribution by him,
   often without going through the form of acknowledging the
   source of inspiration. Even the poem in question cannot be
   pronounced entirely original, though its intrinsic beauty is
   unquestionable. It undoubtedly owes its origin to Burger’s poem
   “Leonora,” which has found so many English translators. Not
   content with a single development of Burger’s ghastly production
   the Russian poet has directly paraphrased “Leonora” under its
   own title, and also written a poem “Liudmila” in imitation of it.
   The principal outlines of these three poems are as follows: A
   maiden loses her lover in the wars; she murmurs at Providence
   and is vainly reproved for such blasphemy by her mother.
   Providence at length loses patience and sends her lover’s spirit,
   to all appearances as if in the flesh, who induces the unfortunate
   maiden to elope. Instead of riding to a church or bridal chamber
   the unpleasant bridegroom resorts to the graveyard and repairs to
   his own grave, from which he has recently issued to execute his
   errand. It is a repulsive subject. “Svetlana,” however, is more
   agreeable than its prototype “Leonora,” inasmuch as the whole
   catastrophe turns out a dream brought on by “sorcery,” during the
   “sviatki” or Holy Nights (see Canto V. st. x), and the dreamer
   awakes to hear the tinkling of her lover’s sledge approaching.
   “Svetlana” has been translated by Sir John Bowring.]
   V
   Meantime Onéguine’s apparition
   At Làrina’s abode produced
   Quite a sensation; the position
   To all good neighbours’ sport conduced.
   Endless conjectures all propound
   And secretly their views expound.
   What jokes and guesses now abound,
   A beau is for Tattiana found!
   In fact, some people were assured
   The wedding-day had been arranged,
   But the date subsequently changed
   Till proper rings could be procured.
   On Lenski’s matrimonial fate
   They long ago had held debate.
   VI
   Of course Tattiana was annoyed
   By such allusions scandalous,
   Yet was her inmost soul o’erjoyed
   With satisfaction marvellous,
   As in her heart the thought sank home,
   I am in love, my hour hath come!
   Thus in the earth the seed expands
   Obedient to warm Spring’s commands.
   Long time her young imagination
   By indolence and languor fired
   The fated nutriment desired;
   And long internal agitation
   Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
   She waited for—I don’t know whom!
   VII
   The fatal hour had come at last—
   She oped her eyes and cried: ’tis he!
   Alas! for now before her passed
   The same warm vision constantly;
   Now all things round about repeat
   Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
   His name: the tenderness of home
   Tiresome unto her hath become
   And the kind-hearted servitors:
   Immersed in melancholy thought,
   She hears of conversation nought
   And hated casual visitors,
   Their coming which no man expects,
   And stay whose length none recollects.
   VIII
   Now with what eager interest
   She the delicious novel reads,
   With what avidity and zest
   She drinks in those seductive deeds!
   All the creations which below
   From happy inspiration flow,
   The swain of Julia Wolmar,
   Malek Adel and De Linar,(31)
   Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
   And that unrivalled paragon,
   The sleep-compelling Grandison,
   Our tender dreamer had enrolled
   A single being: ’twas in fine
   No other than Onéguine mine.
   [Note 31: The heroes of two romances much in vogue in Pushkin’s
   time: the former by Madame Cottin, the latter by the famous
   Madame Krudener. The frequent mention in the course of this
   poem of romances once enjoying a European celebrity but now
   consigned to oblivion, will impress the reader with the
   transitory nature of merely mediocre literary reputation. One
   has now to search for the very names of most of the popular
   authors of Pushkin’s day and rummage biographical dictionaries
   for the dates of their births and deaths. Yet the poet’s prime
   was but fifty years ago, and had he lived to a ripe old age he
   would have been amongst us still. He was four years younger
   than the late Mr. Thomas Carlyle. The decadence of Richardson’s
   popularity amongst his countrymen is a fact familiar to all.]
   IX
   Dreaming herself the heroine
   Of the romances she preferred,
   Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,—(32)
   Tattiana through the forest erred,
   And the bad book accompanies.
   Upon those pages she descries
   Her passion’s faithful counterpart,
   Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
   She heaves a sigh and deep intent
   On raptures, sorrows not her own,
   She murmurs in an undertone
   A letter for her hero meant:
   That hero, though his merit shone,
   Was certainly no Grandison.
   [Note 32: Referring to Richardson’s “Clarissa Harlowe,” “La
   Nouvelle Heloise,” and Madame de Stael’s “Delphine.”]
   X
   Alas! my friends, the years flit by
   And after them at headlong pace
   The evanescent fashions fly
   In motley and amusing chase.
   The world is ever altering!
   Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
   And courtier, fop, and usurer
   Would once in powdered wig appear;
   Time was, the poet’s tender quill
   In hopes of everlasting fame
   A finished madrigal would frame
   Or couplets more ingenious still;
   Time was, a valiant general might
   Serve who could neither read nor write.
   XI
   Time was, in style magniloquent
   Authors replete with sacred fire
   Their heroes used to represent
   All that perfection could desire;
   Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
   Their idols they were wont to invest
   With intellect, a taste refined,
   And handsome countenance combined,
   A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
   The excited hero in a trice
   Was ready for self-sacrifice,
   And in the final tome we learnt,
   Vice had due punishment awarded,
   Virtue was with a bride rewarded.
   XII
   But now our minds are mystified
   And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
   Vice in romance is glorified
   And triumphs in career erotic.
   The monsters of the British Muse
   Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
   The idols of their adoration
   A Vampire fond of meditation,
   Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
   The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
   Or the mysterious Sbogar.(33)
   Byron’s capricious phantasy
   Could in romantic mantle drape
   E’en hopeless egoism’s dark shape.
   [Note 33: “Melmoth,” a romance by Maturin, and “Jean Sbogar,” by
   Ch. Nodier. “The Vampire,” a tale published in 1819, was
   erroneously attributed to Lord Byron. “Salathiel; the Eternal
   Jew,” a romance by Geo. Croly.]
   XIII
   My friends, what means this odd digression?
   May be that I by heaven’s decrees
   Shall abdicate the bard’s profession,
   And shall adopt some new caprice.
   Thus having braved Apollo’s rage
   With humble prose I’ll fill my page
   And a romance in ancient style
   Shall my declining years beguile;
   Nor shall my pen paint terribly
   The torment born of crime unseen,
   But shall depict the touching scene
   Of Russian domesticity;
   I will descant on love’s sweet dream,
   The olden time shall be my theme.
   XIV
   Old people’s simple conversations
   My unpretending page shall fill,
   Their offspring’s innocent flirtations
   By the old lime-tree or the rill,
   Their Jealousy and separation
   And tears of reconciliation:
   Fresh cause of quarrel then I’ll find,
   But finally in wedlock bind.
   The passionate speeches I’ll repeat,
   Accents of rapture or despair
   I uttered to my lady fair
   Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
   Then they came easily enow,
   My tongue is somewhat rusty now.
   XV
   Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
   What bitter tears with thee I shed!
   Thou hast resigned thy destiny
   Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
   Thou’lt suffer, dearest, but before,
   Hope with her fascinating power
   To dire contentment shall give birth
   And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
   Thou’lt quaff love’s sweet envenomed stream,
   Fantastic images shall swarm
   In thy imagination warm,
   Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
   And wheresoe’er thy footsteps err,
   Confront thy fated torturer!
   XVI
   Love’s pangs Tattiana agonize.
   She seeks the garden in her need—
   Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
   And cares not farther to proceed;
   Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
   With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
   Barely to draw her breath she seems,
   Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
   And now ’tis night, the guardian moon
   Sails her allotted course on high,
   And from the misty woodland nigh
   The nightingale trills forth her tune;
   Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
   And thus unto her nurse did say:
   XVII
   “Nurse, ’tis so close I cannot rest.
   Open the window—sit by me.”
   “What ails thee, dear?”—“I feel depressed.
   Relate some ancient history.”
   “But which, my dear?—In days of yore
   Within my memory I bore
   Many an ancient legend which
   In monsters and fair dames was rich;
   But now my mind is desolate,
   What once I knew is clean forgot—
   Alas! how wretched now my lot!”
   “But tell me, nurse, can you relate
   The days which to your youth belong?
   Were you in love when you were young?”—
   XVIII
   “Alack! Tattiana,” she replied,
   “We never loved in days of old,
   My mother-in-law who lately died(34)
   Had killed me had the like been told.”
   “How came you then to wed a man?”—
   “Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
   Was younger than myself, my light,
   For I myself was thirteen quite;(35)
   The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
   Her suit before my parents pressing:
   At last my father gave his blessing,
   And bitter tears of fright I shed.
   Weeping they loosed my tresses long(36)
   And led me off to church with song.”
   [Note 34: A young married couple amongst Russian peasants
   reside in the house of the bridegroom’s father till the
   “tiaglo,” or family circle is broken up by his death.]
   [Note 35: Marriages amongst Russian serfs used formerly to
   take place at ridiculously early ages. Haxthausen asserts
   that strong hearty peasant women were to be seen at work
   in the fields with their infant husbands in their arms. The
   inducement lay in the fact that the “tiaglo” (see previous
   note) received an additional lot of the communal land for
   every male added to its number, though this could have formed
   an inducement in the southern and fertile provinces of Russia
   only, as it is believed that agriculture in the north is so
   unremunerative that land has often to be forced upon the
   peasants, in order that the taxes, for which the whole Commune
   is responsible to Government, may be paid. The abuse of early
   marriages was regulated by Tsar Nicholas.]
   [Note 36: Courtships were not unfrequently carried on in the
   larger villages, which alone could support such an individual,
   by means of a “svakha,” or matchmaker. In Russia unmarried
   girls wear their hair in a single long plait or tail, “kossa;”
   the married women, on the other hand, in two, which are twisted
   into the head-gear.]
   XIX
   “Then amongst strangers I was left—
   But I perceive thou dost not heed—”
   “Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
   Mortally sick I am indeed.
   Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain—”
   “My darling child, thou art in pain.—
   The Lord deliver her and save!
   Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
   I’ll sprinkle thee with holy water.—
   How thy hands burn!”—“Dear nurse, I’m well.
   I am—in love—you know—don’t tell!”
   “The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!”—
   And the old nurse a brief prayer said
   And crossed with trembling hand the maid.
   XX
   “I am in love,” her whispers tell
   The aged woman in her woe:
   “My heart’s delight, thou art not well.”—
   “I am in love, nurse! leave me now.”
   Behold! the moon was shining bright
   And showed with an uncertain light
   Tattiana’s beauty, pale with care,
   Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
   And on the footstool sitting down
   Beside our youthful heroine fair,
   A kerchief round her silver hair
   The aged nurse in ample gown,(37)
   Whilst all creation seemed to dream
   Enchanted by the moon’s pale beam.
   [Note 37: It is thus that I am compelled to render a female
   garment not known, so far as I am aware, to Western Europe.
   It is called by the natives “doushegreika,” that is to say,
   “warmer of the soul”—in French, chaufferette de l’âme. It
   is a species of thick pelisse worn over the “sarafan,” or
   gown.]
   XXI
   But borne in spirit far away
   Tattiana gazes on the moon,
   And starting suddenly doth say:
   “Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
   Pen, paper bring: the table too
   Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go—
   Good-night.” Behold! she is alone!
   ’Tis silent—on her shines the moon—
   Upon her elbow she reclines,
   And Eugene ever in her soul
   Indites an inconsiderate scroll
   Wherein love innocently pines.
   Now it is ready to be sent—
   For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?
   XXII
   I have known beauties cold and raw
   As Winter in their purity,
   Striking the intellect with awe
   By dull insensibility,
   And I admired their common sense
   And natural benevolence,
   But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
   For on their brows I trembling read
   The inscription o’er the gates of Hell
   “Abandon hope for ever here!”(38)
   Love to inspire doth woe appear
   To such—delightful to repel.
   Perchance upon the Neva e’en
   Similar dames ye may have seen.
   [Note 38: A Russian annotator complains that the poet has
   mutilated Dante’s famous line.]
   XXIII
   Amid submissive herds of men
   Virgins miraculous I see,
   Who selfishly unmoved remain
   Alike by sighs and flattery.
   But what astonished do I find
   When harsh demeanour hath consigned
   A timid love to banishment?—
   On fresh allurements they are bent,
   At least by show of sympathy;
   At least their accents and their words
   Appear attuned to softer chords;
   And then with blind credulity
   The youthful lover once again
   Pursues phantasmagoria vain.
   XXIV
   Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?—
   Because in singleness of thought
   She never of deception dreamed
   But trusted the ideal she wrought?—
   Because her passion wanted art,
   Obeyed the impulses of heart?—
   Because she was so innocent,
   That Heaven her character had blent
   With an imagination wild,
   With intellect and strong volition
   And a determined disposition,
   An ardent heart and yet so mild?—
   Doth love’s incautiousness in her
   So irremissible appear?
   XXV
   O ye whom tender love hath pained
   Without the ken of parents both,
   Whose hearts responsive have remained
   To the impressions of our youth,
   The all-entrancing joys of love—
   Young ladies, if ye ever strove
   The mystic lines to tear away
   A lover’s letter might convey,
   Or into bold hands anxiously
   Have e’er a precious tress consigned,
   Or even, silent and resigned,
   When separation’s hour drew nigh,
   Have felt love’s agitated kiss
   With tears, confused emotions, bliss,—
   XXVI
   With unanimity complete,
   Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
   Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
   The sneers of critics superfine;
   And you, O maids immaculate,
   Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
   E’en as the presence of a snake,
   I the same admonition make.
   Who knows? with love’s consuming flame
   Perchance you also soon may burn,
   Then to some gallant in your turn
   Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
   The triumph of a conquest new.
   The God of Love is after you!
   XXVII
   A coquette loves by calculation,
   Tattiana’s love was quite sincere,
   A love which knew no limitation,
   Even as the love of children dear.
   She did not think “procrastination
   Enhances love in estimation
   And thus secures the prey we seek.
   His vanity first let us pique
   With hope and then perplexity,
   Excruciate the heart and late
   With jealous fire resuscitate,
   Lest jaded with satiety,
   The artful prisoner should seek
   Incessantly his chains to break.”
   XXVIII
   I still a complication view,
   My country’s honour and repute
   Demands that I translate for you
   The letter which Tattiana wrote.
   At Russ she was by no means clever
   And read our newspapers scarce ever,
   And in her native language she
   Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
   So she in French herself expressed.
   I cannot help it I declare,
   Though hitherto a lady ne’er
   In Russ her love made manifest,
   And never hath our language proud
   In correspondence been allowed.(39)
   [Note 39: It is well known that until the reign of the late Tsar
   French was the language of the Russian court and of Russian
   fashionable society. It should be borne in mind that at the time
   this poem was written literary warfare more or less open was
   being waged between two hostile schools of Russian men of
   letters. These consisted of the _Arzamass_, or French school, to
   which Pushkin himself together with his uncle Vassili Pushkin
   the “Nestor of the Arzamass” belonged, and their opponents who
   devoted themselves to the cultivation of the vernacular.]
   XXIX
   They wish that ladies should, I hear,
   Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
   I can’t conceive a little dear
   With the “Well-Wisher” in her hand!(40)
   I ask, all ye who poets are,
   Is it not true? the objects fair,
   To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
   Had to compose in secret rhymes,
   To whom your hearts were consecrate,—
   Did they not all the Russian tongue
   With little knowledge and that wrong
   In charming fashion mutilate?
   Did not their lips with foreign speech
   The native Russian tongue impeach?
   [Note 40: The “Blago-Namièrenni,” or “Well-Wisher,” was an
   inferior Russian newspaper of the day, much scoffed at by
   contemporaries. The editor once excused himself for some
   gross error by pleading that he had been “on the loose.”]
   XXX
   God grant I meet not at a ball
   Or at a promenade mayhap,
   A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
   Or a professor in tulle cap.
   As rosy lips without a smile,
   The Russian language I deem vile
   Without grammatical mistakes.
   May be, and this my terror wakes,
   The fair of the next generation,
   As every journal now entreats,
   Will teach grammatical conceits,
   Introduce verse in conversation.
   But I—what is all this to me?
   Will to the old times faithful be.
   XXXI
   Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
   With inexact pronunciation
   Raises within my breast as oft
   As formerly much agitation.
   Repentance wields not now her spell
   And gallicisms I love as well
   As the sins of my youthful days
   Or Bogdanovitch’s sweet lays.(41)
   But I must now employ my Muse
   With the epistle of my fair;
   I promised!—Did I so?—Well, there!
   Now I am ready to refuse.
   I know that Parny’s tender pen(42)
   Is no more cherished amongst men.
   [Note 41: Hippolyte Bogdanovitch—b. 1743, d. 1803—though
   possessing considerable poetical talent was like many other
   Russian authors more remarkable for successful imitation
   than for original genius. His most remarkable production
   is “Doushenka,” “The Darling,” a composition somewhat in
   the style of La Fontaine’s “Psyche.” Its merit consists in
   graceful phraseology, and a strong pervading sense of humour.]
   [Note 42: Parny—a French poet of the era of the first Napoleon,
   b. 1753, d. 1814. Introduced to the aged Voltaire during
   his last visit to Paris, the patriarch laid his hands upon
   the youth’s head and exclaimed: “Mon cher Tibulle.” He is
   chiefly known for his erotic poetry which attracted the
   affectionate regard of the youthful Pushkin when a student
   at the Lyceum. We regret to add that, having accepted a
   pension from Napoleon, Parny forthwith proceeded to damage
   his literary reputation by inditing an “epic” poem entitled
   “Goddam! Goddam! par un French—Dog.” It is descriptive
   of the approaching conquest of Britain by Napoleon, and
   treats the embryo enterprise as if already conducted to a
   successful conclusion and become matter of history. A good
   account of the bard and his creations will be found in the
   _Saturday Review_ of the 2d August 1879.]
   XXXII
   Bard of the “Feasts,” and mournful breast,(43)
   If thou wert sitting by my side,
   With this immoderate request
   I should alarm our friendship tried:
   In one of thine enchanting lays
   To russify the foreign phrase
   Of my impassioned heroine.
   Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
   I yield with a low reverence;
   But lonely beneath Finnish skies
   Where melancholy rocks arise
   He wanders in his indolence;
   Careless of fame his spirit high
   Hears not my importunity!
   [Note 43: Evgeny Baratynski, a contemporary of Pushkin and a
   lyric poet of some originality and talent. The “Feasts” is
   a short brilliant poem in praise of conviviality. Pushkin
   is therein praised as the best of companions “beside the
   bottle.”]
   XXXIII
   Tattiana’s letter I possess,
   I guard it as a holy thing,
   And though I read it with distress,
   I’m o’er it ever pondering.
   Inspired by whom this tenderness,
   This gentle daring who could guess?
   Who this soft nonsense could impart,
   Imprudent prattle of the heart,
   Attractive in its banefulness?
   I cannot understand. But lo!
   A feeble version read below,
   A print without the picture’s grace,
   Or, as it were, the Freischutz’ score
   Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o’er.
   Tattiana’s Letter to Onéguine
   I write to you! Is more required?
   Can lower depths beyond remain?
   ’Tis in your power now, if desired,
   To crush me with a just disdain.
   But if my lot unfortunate
   You in the least commiserate
   You will not all abandon me.
   At first, I clung to secrecy:
   Believe me, of my present shame
   You never would have heard the name,
   If the fond hope I could have fanned
   At times, if only once a week,
   To see you by our fireside stand,
   To listen to the words you speak,
   Address to you one single phrase
   And then to meditate for days
   Of one thing till again we met.
   ’Tis said you are a misanthrope,
   In country solitude you mope,
   And we—an unattractive set—
   Can hearty welcome give alone.
   Why did you visit our poor place?
   Forgotten in the village lone,
   I never should have seen your face
   And bitter torment never known.
   The untutored spirit’s pangs calmed down
   By time (who can anticipate?)
   I had found my predestinate,
   Become a faithful wife and e’en
   A fond and careful mother been.
   Another! to none other I
   My heart’s allegiance can resign,
   My doom has been pronounced on high,
   ’Tis Heaven’s will and I am thine.
   The sum of my existence gone
   But promise of our meeting gave,
   I feel thou wast by God sent down
   My guardian angel to the grave.
   Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
   Unseen thou wast already dear.
   Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
   I heard thy voice’s resonance
   Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
   Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
   I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
   And cried within myself: ’tis he!
   Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
   With thee I conversed when I bore
   Comfort and succour to the poor,
   And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
   To ease the anguish of my breast.
   Nay! even as this instant fled,
   Was it not thou, O vision bright,
   That glimmered through the radiant night
   And gently hovered o’er my head?
   Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
   To whisper comfort, love and hope?
   Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
   Or torturer malevolent?
   Doubt and uncertainty decide:
   All this may be an empty dream,
   Delusions of a mind untried,
   Providence otherwise may deem—
   Then be it so! My destiny
   From henceforth I confide to thee!
   Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
   And thy protection I implore.
   Imagine! Here alone am I!
   No one my anguish comprehends,
   At times my reason almost bends,
   And silently I here must die—
   But I await thee: scarce alive
   My heart with but one look revive;
   Or to disturb my dreams approach
   Alas! with merited reproach.
   ’Tis finished. Horrible to read!
   With shame I shudder and with dread—
   But boldly I myself resign:
   Thine honour is my countersign!
   XXXIV
   Tattiana moans and now she sighs
   And in her grasp the letter shakes,
   Even the rosy wafer dries
   Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
   Her head upon her breast declines
   And an enchanting shoulder shines
   From her half-open vest of night.
   But lo! already the moon’s light
   Is waning. Yonder valley deep
   Looms gray behind the mist and morn
   Silvers the brook; the shepherd’s horn
   Arouses rustics from their sleep.
   ’Tis day, the family downstairs,
   But nought for this Tattiana cares.
   XXXV
   The break of day she doth not see,
   But sits in bed with air depressed,
   Nor on the letter yet hath she
   The image of her seal impressed.
   But gray Phillippevna the door
   Opened with care, and entering bore
   A cup of tea upon a tray.
   “’Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
   My beauty, thou art ready too.
   My morning birdie, yesternight
   I was half silly with affright.
   But praised be God! in health art thou!
   The pains of night have wholly fled,
   Thy cheek is as a poppy red!”
   XXXVI
   “Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!”—
   “Command me, darling, what you choose”—
   “Do not—you might—suspicious be;
   But look you—ah! do not refuse.”
   “I call to witness God on high—”
   “Then send your grandson quietly
   To take this letter to O— Well!
   Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell—
   Command him not to say a word—
   I mean my name not to repeat.”
   “To whom is it to go, my sweet?
   Of late I have been quite absurd,—
   So many neighbours here exist—
   Am I to go through the whole list?”
   XXXVII
   “How dull you are this morning, nurse!”
   “My darling, growing old am I!
   In age the memory gets worse,
   But I was sharp in times gone by.
   In times gone by thy bare command—”
   “Oh! nurse, nurse, you don’t understand!
   What is thy cleverness to me?
   The letter is the thing, you see,—
   Onéguine’s letter!”—“Ah! the thing!
   Now don’t be cross with me, my soul,
   You know that I am now a fool—
   But why are your cheeks whitening?”
   “Nothing, good nurse, there’s nothing wrong,
   But send your grandson before long.”
   XXXVIII
   No answer all that day was borne.
   Another passed; ’twas just the same.
   Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
   Tattiana waits. No answer came!
   Olga’s admirer came that day:
   “Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?”
   The hostess doth interrogate:
   “He hath neglected us of late.”—
   Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick—
   “He promised here this day to ride,”
   Lenski unto the dame replied,
   “The post hath kept him, it is like.”
   Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
   As if he cruelly had joked!
   XXXIX
   ’Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
   Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,(44)
   The china teapot too ye might
   In clouds of steam above perceive.
   Into the cups already sped
   By Olga’s hand distributed
   The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
   And a boy handed round the cream.
   Tania doth by the casement linger
   And breathes upon the chilly glass,
   Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
   And traces with a slender finger
   Upon its damp opacity,
   The mystic monogram, O. E.
   [Note 44: The _samovar_, i.e. “self-boiler,” is merely an
   urn for hot water having a fire in the center. We may observe
   a similar contrivance in our own old-fashioned tea-urns which
   are provided with a receptacle for a red-hot iron cylinder in
   center. The tea-pot is usually placed on the top of the
   _samovar_.]
   XL
   In the meantime her spirit sinks,
   Her weary eyes are filled with tears—
   A horse’s hoofs she hears—She shrinks!
   Nearer they come—Eugene appears!
   Ah! than a spectre from the dead
   More swift the room Tattiana fled,
   From hall to yard and garden flies,
   Not daring to cast back her eyes.
   She fears and like an arrow rushes
   Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
   The bridge and alley to the lake,
   Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
   The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
   Till out of breath upon a seat
   XLI
   She sank.—
      “He’s here! Eugene is here!
   Merciful God, what will he deem?”
   Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
   Guards fondly hope’s uncertain dream.
   She waits, on fire her trembling frame—
   Will he pursue?—But no one came.
   She heard of servant-maids the note,
   Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
   Singing in chorus all the while.
   (This by command; for it was found,
   However cherries might abound,
   They disappeared by stealth and guile,
   So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit—
   Device of rural minds acute!)
   The Maidens’ Song
   Young maidens, fair maidens,
   Friends and companions,
   Disport yourselves, maidens,
   Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
   Come sing we in chorus
   The secrets of maidens.
   Allure the young gallant
   With dance and with song.
   As we lure the young gallant,
   Espy him approaching,
   Disperse yourselves, darlings,
   And pelt him with cherries,
   With cherries, red currants,
   With raspberries, cherries.
   Approach not to hearken
   To secrets of virgins,
   Approach not to gaze at
   The frolics of maidens.
   XLII
   They sang, whilst negligently seated,
   Attentive to the echoing sound,
   Tattiana with impatience waited
   Until her heart less high should bound—
   Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
   But tremor still her frame possessed,
   Nor did her blushes fade away,
   More crimson every moment they.
   Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
   With iridescent wing doth flap
   When captured in a schoolboy’s cap;
   Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
   She from the winter corn espies
   A sportsman who in covert lies.
   XLIII
   But finally she heaves a sigh,
   And rising from her bench proceeds;
   But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
   Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
   When Eugene like a ghost did rise
   Before her straight with roguish eyes.
   Tattiana faltered, and became
   Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
   But this adventure’s consequence
   To-day, my friends, at any rate,
   I am not strong enough to state;
   I, after so much eloquence,
   Must take a walk and rest a bit—
   Some day I’ll somehow finish it.
   End of Canto the Third
      CANTO THE FOURTH
   Rural Life
   ‘La Morale est dans la nature des choses.’—Necker
   Canto The Fourth
   [Mikhailovskoe, 1825]
   I
   The less we love a lady fair
   The easier ’tis to gain her grace,
   And the more surely we ensnare
   Her in the pitfalls which we place.
   Time was when cold seduction strove
   To swagger as the art of love,
   Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
   Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
   But this amusement delicate
   Was worthy of that old baboon,
   Our fathers used to dote upon;
   The Lovelaces are out of date,
   Their glory with their heels of red
   And long perukes hath vanishèd.
   II
   For who imposture can endure,
   A constant harping on one tune,
   Serious endeavours to assure
   What everybody long has known;
   Ever to hear the same replies
   And overcome antipathies
   Which never have existed, e’en
   In little maidens of thirteen?
   And what like menaces fatigues,
   Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
   Epistles of six sheets or near,
   Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
   Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
   And husbands’ tedious amity?
   III
   Such were the musings of Eugene.
   He in the early years of life
   Had a deluded victim been
   Of error and the passions’ strife.
   By daily life deteriorated,
   Awhile this beauty captivated,
   And that no longer could inspire.
   Slowly exhausted by desire,
   Yet satiated with success,
   In solitude or worldly din,
   He heard his soul’s complaint within,
   With laughter smothered weariness:
   And thus he spent eight years of time,
   Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
   IV
   Though beauty he no more adored,
   He still made love in a queer way;
   Rebuffed—as quickly reassured,
   Jilted—glad of a holiday.
   Without enthusiasm he met
   The fair, nor parted with regret,
   Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
   Thus a guest with composure will
   To take a hand at whist oft come:
   He takes his seat, concludes his game,
   And straight returning whence he came,
   Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
   And in the morning doth not know
   Whither that evening he will go.
   V
   However, Tania’s letter reading,
   Eugene was touched with sympathy;
   The language of her girlish pleading
   Aroused in him sweet reverie.
   He called to mind Tattiana’s grace,
   Pallid and melancholy face,
   And in a vision, sinless, bright,
   His spirit sank with strange delight.
   May be the empire of the sense,
   Regained authority awhile,
   But he desired not to beguile
   Such open-hearted innocence.
   But to the garden once again
   Wherein we lately left the twain.
   VI
   Two minutes they in silence spent,
   Onéguine then approached and said:
   “You have a letter to me sent.
   Do not excuse yourself. I read
   Confessions which a trusting heart
   May well in innocence impart.
   Charming is your sincerity,
   Feelings which long had ceased to be
   It wakens in my breast again.
   But I came not to adulate:
   Your frankness I shall compensate
   By an avowal just as plain.
   An ear to my confession lend;
   To thy decree my will I bend.
   VII
   “If the domestic hearth could bless—
   My sum of happiness contained;
   If wife and children to possess
   A happy destiny ordained:
   If in the scenes of home I might
   E’en for an instant find delight,
   Then, I say truly, none but thee
   I would desire my bride to be—
   I say without poetic phrase,
   Found the ideal of my youth,
   Thee only would I choose, in truth,
   As partner of my mournful days,
   Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
   And be as happy—as I might.
   VIII
   “But strange am I to happiness;
   ’Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
   Me your perfections would not bless;
   I am not worthy them in aught;
   And honestly ’tis my belief
   Our union would produce but grief.
   Though now my love might be intense,
   Habit would bring indifference.
   I see you weep. Those tears of yours
   Tend not my heart to mitigate,
   But merely to exasperate;
   Judge then what roses would be ours,
   What pleasures Hymen would prepare
   For us, may be for many a year.
   IX
   “What can be drearier than the house,
   Wherein the miserable wife
   Deplores a most unworthy spouse
   And leads a solitary life?
   The tiresome man, her value knowing,
   Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
   Is full of frigid jealousy,
   Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
   Such am I. This did ye expect,
   When in simplicity ye wrote
   Your innocent and charming note
   With so much warmth and intellect?
   Hath fate apportioned unto thee
   This lot in life with stern decree?
   X
   “Ideas and time ne’er backward move;
   My soul I cannot renovate—
   I love you with a brother’s love,
   Perchance one more affectionate.
   Listen to me without disdain.
   A maid hath oft, may yet again
   Replace the visions fancy drew;
   Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
   As in their turn the seasons roll.
   ’Tis evidently Heaven’s will
   You fall in love again. But still—
   Learn to possess more self-control.
   Not all will like myself proceed—
   And thoughtlessness to woe might lead.”
   XI
   Thus did our friend Onéguine preach:
   Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
   Attentive listened to his speech,
   All breathless and without replies.
   His arm he offers. Mute and sad
   (_Mechanically_, let us add),
   Tattiana doth accept his aid;
   And, hanging down her head, the maid
   Around the garden homeward hies.
   Together they returned, nor word
   Of censure for the same incurred;
   The country hath its liberties
   And privileges nice allowed,
   Even as Moscow, city proud.
   XII
   Confess, O ye who this peruse,
   Onéguine acted very well
   By poor Tattiana in the blues;
   ’Twas not the first time, I can tell
   You, he a noble mind disclosed,
   Though some men, evilly disposed,
   Spared him not their asperities.
   His friends and also enemies
   (One and the same thing it may be)
   Esteemed him much as the world goes.
   Yes! every one must have his foes,
   But Lord! from friends deliver me!
   The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
   I’ve had to make for having friends!
   XIII
   But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
   Dark, unavailing reverie,
   I just hint, in parenthesis,
   There is no stupid calumny
   Born of a babbler in a loft
   And by the world repeated oft,
   There is no fishmarket retort
   And no ridiculous report,
   Which your true friend with a sweet smile
   Where fashionable circles meet
   A hundred times will not repeat,
   Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
   And yet he in your cause would strive
   And loves you as—a relative!
   XIV
   Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
   Are all your relatives quite well?
   Permit me; is it worth the trouble
   For your instruction here to tell
   What I by relatives conceive?
   These are your relatives, believe:
   Those whom we ought to love, caress,
   With spiritual tenderness;
   Whom, as the custom is of men,
   We visit about Christmas Day,
   Or by a card our homage pay,
   That until Christmas comes again
   They may forget that we exist.
   And so—God bless them, if He list.
   XV
   In this the love of the fair sex
   Beats that of friends and relatives:
   In love, although its tempests vex,
   Our liberty at least survives:
   Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
   The natural fickleness of passion,
   The torrent of opinion,
   And the fair sex as light as down!
   Besides the hobbies of a spouse
   Should be respected throughout life
   By every proper-minded wife,
   And this the faithful one allows,
   When in as instant she is lost,—
   Satan will jest, and at love’s cost.
   XVI
   Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
   Where is he who doth not deceive?
   Who words and actions will adjust
   To standards in which we believe?
   Oh! who is not calumnious?
   Who labours hard to humour us?
   To whom are our misfortunes grief
   And who is not a tiresome thief?
   My venerated reader, oh!
   Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
   Spare yourself unavailing pain
   And all your love on self bestow;
   A worthy object ’tis, and well
   I know there’s none more amiable.
   XVII
   But from the interview what flowed?
   Alas! It is not hard to guess.
   The insensate fire of love still glowed
   Nor discontinued to distress
   A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
   Tattiana more than ever burned
   With hopeless passion: from her bed
   Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
   Her health, life’s sweetness and its bloom,
   Her smile and maidenly repose,
   All vanished as an echo goes.
   Across her youth a shade had come,
   As when the tempest’s veil is drawn
   Across the smiling face of dawn.
   XVIII
   Alas! Tattiana fades away,
   Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
   Listless is she the livelong day
   Nor interest in aught betrays.
   Shaking with serious air the head,
   In whispers low the neighbours said:
   ’Tis time she to the altar went!
   But enough! Now, ’tis my intent
   The imagination to enliven
   With love which happiness extends;
   Against my inclination, friends,
   By sympathy I have been driven.
   Forgive me! Such the love I bear
   My heroine, Tattiana dear.
   XIX
   Vladimir, hourly more a slave
   To youthful Olga’s beauty bright,
   Into delicious bondage gave
   His ardent soul with full delight.
   Always together, eventide
   Found them in darkness side by side,
   At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
   Around the meadow and the grove.
   And what resulted? Drunk with love,
   But with confused and bashful air,
   Lenski at intervals would dare,
   If Olga smilingly approve,
   Dally with a dishevelled tress
   Or kiss the border of her dress.
   XX
   To Olga frequently he would
   Some nice instructive novel read,
   Whose author nature understood
   Better than Chateaubriand did
   Yet sometimes pages two or three
   (Nonsense and pure absurdity,
   For maiden’s hearing deemed unfit),
   He somewhat blushing would omit:
   Far from the rest the pair would creep
   And (elbows on the table) they
   A game of chess would often play,
   Buried in meditation deep,
   Till absently Vladimir took
   With his own pawn alas! his rook!
   XXI
   Homeward returning, he at home
   Is occupied with Olga fair,
   An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
   He leisurely adorns for her.
   Landscapes thereon he would design,
   A tombstone, Aphrodite’s shrine,
   Or, with a pen and colours fit,
   A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
   The “in memoriam” pages sought,
   Where many another hand had signed
   A tender couplet he combined,
   A register of fleeting thought,
   A flimsy trace of musings past
   Which might for many ages last.
   XXII
   Surely ye all have overhauled
   A country damsel’s album trim,
   Which all her darling friends have scrawled
   From first to last page to the rim.
   Behold! orthography despising,
   Metreless verses recognizing
   By friendship how they were abused,
   Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
   Upon the opening page ye find:
   _Qu’ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
   Subscribed, _toujours à vous, Annette;_
   And on the last one, underlined:
   _Who in thy love finds more delight
   Beyond this may attempt to write_.
   XXIII
   Infallibly you there will find
   Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
   And vows will probably be signed:
   _Affectionately yours till death_.
   Some army poet therein may
   Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
   In such an album with delight
   I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
   Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
   My verses, kindly meant, would earn
   Delighted glances in return;
   That afterwards with evil smile
   They would not solemnly debate
   If cleverly or not I prate.
   XXIV
   But, O ye tomes without compare,
   Which from the devil’s bookcase start,
   Albums magnificent which scare
   The fashionable rhymester’s heart!
   Yea! although rendered beauteous
   By Tolstoy’s pencil marvellous,
   Though Baratynski verses penned,(45)
   The thunderbolt on you descend!
   Whene’er a brilliant courtly dame
   Presents her quarto amiably,
   Despair and anger seize on me,
   And a malicious epigram
   Trembles upon my lips from spite,—
   And madrigals I’m asked to write!
   [Note 45: Count Tolstoy, a celebrated artist who subsequently
   became Vice-President of the Academy of Arts at St. Petersburg.
   Baratynski, see Note 43.]
   XXV
   But Lenski madrigals ne’er wrote
   In Olga’s album, youthful maid,
   To purest love he tuned his note
   Nor frigid adulation paid.
   What never was remarked or heard
   Of Olga he in song averred;
   His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
   Both natural and truthful seemed.
   Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise(46)
   In amorous flights when so inspired,
   Singing God knows what maid admired,
   And all thy precious elegies,
   Sometime collected, shall relate
   The story of thy life and fate.
   [Note 46: Yazykoff, a poet contemporary with Pushkin. He was
   an author of promise—unfulfilled.]
   XXVI
   Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
   Incited by his stormy Muse
   Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
   But Olga would not such peruse.
   When poets lachrymose recite
   Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
   Their own productions, some insist
   No greater pleasure can exist
   Just so! that modest swain is blest
   Who reads his visionary theme
   To the fair object of his dream,
   A beauty languidly at rest,
   Yes, happy—though she at his side
   By other thoughts be occupied.
   XXVII
   But I the products of my Muse,
   Consisting of harmonious lays,
   To my old nurse alone peruse,
   Companion of my childhood’s days.
   Or, after dinner’s dull repast,
   I by the button-hole seize fast
   My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
   And breathe a drama in his ear.
   Or else (I deal not here in jokes),
   Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
   I sail upon my lake at times
   And terrify a swarm of ducks,
   Who, heard the music of my lay,
   Take to their wings and fly away.
   XXVIII
   But to Onéguine! _A propos!_
   Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
   His daily occupations, lo!
   Minutely I will now portray.
   A hermit’s life Onéguine led,
   At seven in summer rose from bed,
   And clad in airy costume took
   His course unto the running brook.
   There, aping Gulnare’s bard, he spanned
   His Hellespont from bank to bank,
   And then a cup of coffee drank,
   Some wretched journal in his hand;
   Then dressed himself...(*)
   [Note: Stanza left unfinished by the author.]
   XXIX
   Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
   The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
   The uncontaminated kiss
   Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
   A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
   A dinner, whimsical each course,
   A bottle of a vintage white
   And solitude and calm delight.
   Such was Onéguine’s sainted life,
   And such unconsciously he led,
   Nor marked how summer’s prime had fled
   In aimless ease and far from strife,
   The curse of commonplace delight.
   And town and friends forgotten quite.
   XXX
   This northern summer of our own,
   On winters of the south a skit,
   Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
   Though we will not acknowledge it.
   Already Autumn chilled the sky,
   The tiny sun shone less on high
   And shorter had the days become.
   The forests in mysterious gloom
   Were stripped with melancholy sound,
   Upon the earth a mist did lie
   And many a caravan on high
   Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
   A weary season was at hand—
   November at the gate did stand.
   XXXI
   The morn arises foggy, cold,
   The silent fields no peasant nears,
   The wolf upon the highways bold
   With his ferocious mate appears.
   Detecting him the passing horse
   Snorts, and his rider bends his course
   And wisely gallops to the hill.
   No more at dawn the shepherd will
   Drive out the cattle from their shed,
   Nor at the hour of noon with sound
   Of horn in circle call them round.
   Singing inside her hut the maid
   Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
   The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.
   XXXII
   Already crisp hoar frosts impose
   O’er all a sheet of silvery dust
   (Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
   There! take it quickly, if ye must).
   Behold! than polished floor more nice
   The shining river clothed in ice;
   A joyous troop of little boys
   Engrave the ice with strident noise.
   A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
   Thinking to float upon the stream,
   Descends the bank with care extreme,
   But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
   The first bright wreathing storm of snow
   Which falls in starry flakes below.
   XXXIII
   How in the country pass this time?
   Walking? The landscape tires the eye
   In winter by its blank and dim
   And naked uniformity.
   On horseback gallop o’er the steppe!
   Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
   His footing on the treacherous rime
   And may fall headlong any time.
   Alone beneath your rooftree stay
   And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!(47)
   Keep your accounts! You’d rather not?
   Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
   Will pass; the same to-morrow try—
   You’ll spend your winter famously!
   [Note 47: The Abbé de Pradt: b. 1759, d. 1837. A political
   pamphleteer of the French Revolution: was at first an emigre,
   but made his peace with Napoleon and was appointed Archbishop
   of Malines.]
   XXXIV
   A true Childe Harold my Eugene
   To idle musing was a prey;
   At morn an icy bath within
   He sat, and then the livelong day,
   Alone within his habitation
   And buried deep in meditation,
   He round the billiard-table stalked,
   The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
   When evening o’er the landscape looms,
   Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
   A table to the fire is brought,
   And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
   Driving abreast three horses gray.
   “Bring dinner now without delay!”
   XXXV
   Upon the table in a trice
   Of widow Clicquot or Moet
   A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
   For the young poet they display.
   Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
   Its ebullition foaming white
   (Like other things I could relate)
   My heart of old would captivate.
   The last poor obol I was worth—
   Was it not so?—for thee I gave,
   And thy inebriating wave
   Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
   And oh! what verses, what delights,
   Delicious visions, jests and fights!
   XXXVI
   Alas! my stomach it betrays
   With its exhilarating flow,
   And I confess that now-a-days
   I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
   To cope with Ay no more I dare,
   For Ay is like a mistress fair,
   Seductive, animated, bright,
   But wilful, frivolous, and light.
   But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
   Who in the agony of grief
   Is ever ready with relief,
   Assistance ever will extend,
   Or quietly partake our woe.
   All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!
   XXXVII
   The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
   The golden ember now enshrines,
   And barely visible the smoke
   Upward in a thin stream inclines.
   But little warmth the fireplace lends,
   Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
   The goblet still is bubbling bright—
   Outside descend the mists of night.
   How pleasantly the evening jogs
   When o’er a glass with friends we prate
   Just at the hour we designate
   The time between the wolf and dogs—
   I cannot tell on what pretence—
   But lo! the friends to chat commence.
   XXXVIII
   “How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
   Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?”—
   “The family are all quite well—
   Give me just half a glass of wine—
   They sent their compliments—but oh!
   How charming Olga’s shoulders grow!
   Her figure perfect grows with time!
   She is an angel! We sometime
   Must visit them. Come! you must own,
   My friend, ’tis but to pay a debt,
   For twice you came to them and yet
   You never since your nose have shown.
   But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
   They have invited you this week.”
   XXXIX
   “Me?”—“Yes! It is Tattiana’s fête
   Next Saturday. The Làrina
   Told me to ask you. Ere that date
   Make up your mind to go there.”—“Ah!
   It will be by a mob beset
   Of every sort and every set!”—
   “Not in the least, assured am I!”—
   “Who will be there?”—“The family.
   Do me a favour and appear.
   Will you?”—“Agreed.”—“I thank you, friend,”
   And saying this Vladimir drained
   His cup unto his maiden dear.
   Then touching Olga they depart
   In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!
   XL
   He was most gay. The happy date
   In three weeks would arrive for them;
   The secrets of the marriage state
   And love’s delicious diadem
   With rapturous longing he awaits,
   Nor in his dreams anticipates
   Hymen’s embarrassments, distress,
   And freezing fits of weariness.
   Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
   In life domestic see a string
   Of pictures painful harrowing,
   A novel in Lafontaine’s style,
   My wretched Lenski’s fate I mourn,
   He seemed for matrimony born.
   XLI
   He was beloved: or say at least,
   He thought so, and existence charmed.
   The credulous indeed are blest,
   And he who, jealousy disarmed,
   In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
   As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
   Or, parable more flattering,
   As butterflies to blossoms cling.
   But wretched who anticipates,
   Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
   Who every gesture, every phrase
   In true interpretation hates:
   Whose heart experience icy made
   And yet oblivion forbade.
   End of Canto The Fourth
      CANTO THE FIFTH
   The Fête
   ‘Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
      O my Svetlana.’—Joukóvski
   Canto The Fifth
   [Note: Mikhailovskoe, 1825-6]
   I
   That year the autumn season late
   Kept lingering on as loath to go,
   All Nature winter seemed to await,
   Till January fell no snow—
   The third at night. Tattiana wakes
   Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
   Park, garden, palings, yard below
   And roofs near morn blanched o’er with snow;
   Upon the windows tracery,
   The trees in silvery array,
   Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
   And the far mountains daintily
   O’erspread with Winter’s carpet bright,
   All so distinct, and all so white!
   II
   Winter! The peasant blithely goes
   To labour in his sledge forgot,
   His pony sniffing the fresh snows
   Just manages a feeble trot
   Though deep he sinks into the drift;
   Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,(48)
   Its driver seated on the rim
   In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
   Yonder the household lad doth run,
   Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
   Himself transformed into a hack;
   To freeze his finger hath begun,
   He laughs, although it aches from cold,
   His mother from the door doth scold.
   [Note 48: The “kibitka,” properly speaking, whether on wheels
   or runners, is a vehicle with a hood not unlike a big cradle.]
   III
   In scenes like these it may be though,
   Ye feel but little interest,
   They are all natural and low,
   Are not with elegance impressed.
   Another bard with art divine
   Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
   The first appearance of the snows
   And all the joys which Winter knows.
   He will delight you, I am sure,
   When he in ardent verse portrays
   Secret excursions made in sleighs;
   But competition I abjure
   Either with him or thee in song,
   Bard of the Finnish maiden young.(49)
   [Note 49: The allusions in the foregoing stanza are in the first
   place to a poem entitled “The First Snow,” by Prince Viazemski
   and secondly to “Eda,” by Baratynski, a poem descriptive of life
   in Finland.]
   IV
   Tattiana, Russian to the core,
   Herself not knowing well the reason,
   The Russian winter did adore
   And the cold beauties of the season:
   On sunny days the glistening rime,
   Sledging, the snows, which at the time
   Of sunset glow with rosy light,
   The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
   These evenings as in days of old
   The Làrinas would celebrate,
   The servants used to congregate
   And the young ladies fortunes told,
   And every year distributed
   Journeys and warriors to wed.
   V
   Tattiana in traditions old
   Believed, the people’s wisdom weird,
   In dreams and what the moon foretold
   And what she from the cards inferred.
   Omens inspired her soul with fear,
   Mysteriously all objects near
   A hidden meaning could impart,
   Presentiments oppressed her heart.
   Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
   With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
   Tattiana certainly infers
   That guests approach: and when above
   The new moon’s crescent slim she spied,
   Suddenly to the left hand side,
   VI
   She trembled and grew deadly pale.
   Or a swift meteor, may be,
   Across the gloom of heaven would sail
   And disappear in space; then she
   Would haste in agitation dire
   To mutter her concealed desire
   Ere the bright messenger had set.
   When in her walks abroad she met
   A friar black approaching near,(50)
   Or a swift hare from mead to mead
   Had run across her path at speed,
   Wholly beside herself with fear,
   Anticipating woe she pined,
   Certain misfortune near opined.
   [Note 50: The Russian clergy are divided into two classes:
   the white or secular, which is made up of the mass of parish
   priests, and the black who inhabit the monasteries, furnish
   the high dignitaries of the Church, and constitute that swarm
   of useless drones for whom Peter the Great felt such a deep
   repugnance.]
   VII
   Wherefore? She found a secret joy
   In horror for itself alone,
   Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
   Thus her perversity hath shown.
   Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!(51)
   When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
   Before whose inexperienced sight
   Life lies extended, vast and bright,
   To peer into the future tries.
   Old age through spectacles too peers,
   Although the destined coffin nears,
   Having lost all in life we prize.
   It matters not. Hope e’en to these
   With childlike lisp will lie to please.
   [Note 51: Refers to the “Sviatki” or Holy Nights between Christmas
   Eve and Twelfth Night. Divination, or the telling of fortunes
   by various expedients, is the favourite pastime on these
   occasions.]
   VIII
   Tattiana gazed with curious eye
   On melted wax in water poured;
   The clue unto some mystery
   She deemed its outline might afford.
   Rings from a dish of water full
   In order due the maidens pull;
   But when Tattiana’s hand had ta’en
   A ring she heard the ancient strain:
   _The peasants there are rich as kings,
   They shovel silver with a spade,
   He whom we sing to shall be made
   Happy and glorious_. But this brings
   With sad refrain misfortune near.
   Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.(52)
   [Note 52: During the “sviatki” it is a common custom for the girls
   to assemble around a table on which is placed a dish or basin of
   water which contains a ring. Each in her turn extracts the ring
   from the basin whilst the remainder sing in chorus the “podbliudni
   pessni,” or “dish songs” before mentioned. These are popularly
   supposed to indicate the fortunes of the immediate holder of the
   ring. The first-named lines foreshadow death; the latter, the
   “kashourka,” or “kitten song,” indicates approaching marriage. It
   commences thus: “The cat asked the kitten to sleep on the stove.”]
   IX
   Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
   The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
   Sailed silently in unison—
   Tattiana in the yard appears
   In a half-open dressing-gown
   And bends her mirror on the moon,
   But trembling on the mirror dark
   The sad moon only could remark.
   List! the snow crunches—he draws nigh!
   The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
   And her voice sweeter than the sounds
   Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
   “What is your name?” The boor looked dazed,
   And “Agathon” replied, amazed.(53)
   [Note 53: The superstition is that the name of the future husband
   may thus be discovered.]
   X
   Tattiana (nurse the project planned)
   By night prepared for sorcery,
   And in the bathroom did command
   To lay two covers secretly.
   But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
   And I, remembering Svetlana,(54)
   Become alarmed. So never mind!
   I’m not for witchcraft now inclined.
   So she her silken sash unlaced,
   Undressed herself and went to bed
   And soon Lel hovered o’er her head.(55)
   Beneath her downy pillow placed,
   A little virgin mirror peeps.
   ’Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
   [Note 54: See Note 30.]
   [Note 55: Lel, in Slavonic mythology, corresponds to the Morpheus
   of the Latins. The word is evidently connected with the verb
   “leleyat” to fondle or soothe, likewise with our own word
   “to lull.”]
   XI
   A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
   She dreamt she journeyed o’er a field
   All covered up with snow in heaps,
   By melancholy fogs concealed.
   Amid the snowdrifts which surround
   A stream, by winter’s ice unbound,
   Impetuously clove its way
   With boiling torrent dark and gray;
   Two poles together glued by ice,
   A fragile bridge and insecure,
   Spanned the unbridled torrent o’er;
   Beside the thundering abyss
   Tattiana in despair unfeigned
   Rooted unto the spot remained.
   XII
   As if against obstruction sore
   Tattiana o’er the stream complained;
   To help her to the other shore
   No one appeared to lend a hand.
   But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
   And what from its recess appears?
   A bristly bear of monstrous size!
   He roars, and “Ah!” Tattiana cries.
   He offers her his murderous paw;
   She nerves herself from her alarm
   And leans upon the monster’s arm,
   With footsteps tremulous with awe
   Passes the torrent But alack!
   Bruin is marching at her back!
   XIII
   She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
   Accelerates her hasty pace,
   But cannot anyhow evade
   Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
   The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
   A forest now she sees in front
   With fir-trees standing motionless
   In melancholy loveliness,
   Their branches by the snow bowed down.
   Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
   The shining orbs of night appear;
   There is no path; the storm hath strewn
   Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
   And all in snow is buried deep.
   XIV
   The wood she enters—bear behind,—
   In snow she sinks up to the knee;
   Now a long branch itself entwined
   Around her neck, now violently
   Away her golden earrings tore;
   Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
   Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
   Her handkerchief she loses now;
   No time to pick it up! afraid,
   She hears the bear behind her press,
   Nor dares the skirting of her dress
   For shame lift up the modest maid.
   She runs, the bear upon her trail,
   Until her powers of running fail.
   XV
   She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
   Adroitly seized and carried her;
   Submissive as if in a swoon,
   She cannot draw a breath or stir.
   He dragged her by a forest road
   Till amid trees a hovel showed,
   By barren snow heaped up and bound,
   A tangled wilderness around.
   Bright blazed the window of the place,
   Within resounded shriek and shout:
   “My chum lives here,” Bruin grunts out.
   “Warm yourself here a little space!”
   Straight for the entrance then he made
   And her upon the threshold laid.
   XVI
   Recovering, Tania gazes round;
   Bear gone—she at the threshold placed;
   Inside clink glasses, cries resound
   As if it were some funeral feast.
   But deeming all this nonsense pure,
   She peeped through a chink of the door.
   What doth she see? Around the board
   Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
   A canine face with horns thereon,
   Another with cock’s head appeared,
   Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
   There an imperious skeleton;
   A dwarf adorned with tail, again
   A shape half cat and half a crane.
   XVII
   Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
   A crab upon a spider rides,
   Perched on a goose’s neck a skull
   In scarlet cap revolving glides.
   A windmill too a jig performs
   And wildly waves its arms and storms;
   Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
   The speech of man and tramp of horse.
   But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
   When in that company she saw
   Him who inspired both love and awe,
   The hero we immortalize.
   Onéguine sat the table by
   And viewed the door with cunning eye.
   XVIII
   All bustle when he makes a sign:
   He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
   He smiles, in laughter all combine;
   He knits his brows—’tis silent all.
   He there is master—that is plain;
   Tattiana courage doth regain
   And grown more curious by far
   Just placed the entrance door ajar.
   The wind rose instantly, blew out
   The fire of the nocturnal lights;
   A trouble fell upon the sprites;
   Onéguine lightning glances shot;
   Furious he from the table rose;
   All arise. To the door he goes.
   XIX
   Terror assails her. Hastily
   Tattiana would attempt to fly,
   She cannot—then impatiently
   She strains her throat to force a cry—
   She cannot—Eugene oped the door
   And the young girl appeared before
   Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
   Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
   And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
   Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
   Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
   Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
   Are turned upon her. All combine
   In one great shout: she’s mine! she’s mine!
   XX
   “Mine!” cried Eugene with savage tone.
   The troop of apparitions fled,
   And in the frosty night alone
   Remained with him the youthful maid.
   With tranquil air Onéguine leads
   Tattiana to a corner, bids
   Her on a shaky bench sit down;
   His head sinks slowly, rests upon
   Her shoulder—Olga swiftly came—
   And Lenski followed—a light broke—
   His fist Onéguine fiercely shook
   And gazed around with eyes of flame;
   The unbidden guests he roughly chides—
   Tattiana motionless abides.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
